*For correspondence: adevor@
ucsd.edu
†
These authors contributed
equally to this work
Present address: ‡Central
European Institute of
Technology, Faculty of
Mechanical Engineering, Brno
University of Technology and
Institute of Physical Engineering,
Brno, Czech Republic
Competing interest: See
page 18
Funding: See page 18
Received: 09 January 2016
Accepted: 30 May 2016
Published: 31 May 2016
Reviewing editor: Sacha B
Nelson, Brandeis University,
Waltham, United States
Copyright Uhlirova et al. This
article is distributed under the
terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License, which
permits unrestricted use and
redistribution provided that the
original author and source are
credited.
Cell type specificity of neurovascular
coupling in cerebral cortex
Hana Uhlirova1†‡, Kıvılcım Kılıc¸ 2†, Peifang Tian2,3, Martin Thunemann1
,
Miche` le Desjardins1
, Payam A Saisan2
, Sava Sakadzˇic´
4
, Torbjørn V Ness5
,
Celine Mateo6
, Qun Cheng2
, Kimberly L Weldy2
, Florence Razoux2
,
Matthieu Vandenberghe1,7, Jonathan A Cremonesi8
, Christopher GL Ferri2
,
Krystal Nizar9
, Vishnu B Sridhar10, Tyler C Steed9
, Maxim Abashin11
,
Yeshaiahu Fainman11, Eliezer Masliah2
, Srdjan Djurovic12,13, Ole A Andreassen7
,
Gabriel A Silva10,14, David A Boas4
, David Kleinfeld6,11,15, Richard B Buxton1
,
Gaute T Einevoll5,16, Anders M Dale1,2, Anna Devor1,2,4*
1Department of Radiology, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, United
States; 2Department of Neurosciences, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla,
United States; 3Department of Physics, John Carroll University, University Heights,
United States; 4Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging, Harvard Medical School,
Charlestown, United States; 5Department of Mathematical Sciences and
Technology, Norwegian University of Life Sciences, A˚ s, Norway; 6Department of
Physics, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, United States; 7NORMENT, KG
Jebsen Centre for Psychosis Research, Division of Mental Health and Addiction,
University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway; 8Biology Undergraduate Program, University of
California, San Diego, La Jolla, United States; 9Neurosciences Graduate Program,
University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, United States; 10Department of
Bioengineering, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, United States;
11Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California, San
Diego, La Jolla, United States; 12Department of Medical Genetics, Oslo University
Hospital, Oslo, Norway; 13NORMENT, KG Jebsen Centre for Psychosis Research,
Department of Clinical Science, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway;
14Department of Ophthalmology, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla,
United States; 15Section of Neurobiology, University of California, San Diego, La
Jolla, United States; 16Department of Physics, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway
Abstract Identification of the cellular players and molecular messengers that communicate
neuronal activity to the vasculature driving cerebral hemodynamics is important for (1) the basic
understanding of cerebrovascular regulation and (2) interpretation of functional Magnetic
Resonance Imaging (fMRI) signals. Using a combination of optogenetic stimulation and 2-photon
imaging in mice, we demonstrate that selective activation of cortical excitation and inhibition elicits
distinct vascular responses and identify the vasoconstrictive mechanism as Neuropeptide Y (NPY)
acting on Y1 receptors. The latter implies that task-related negative Blood Oxygenation Level
Dependent (BOLD) fMRI signals in the cerebral cortex under normal physiological conditions may
be mainly driven by the NPY-positive inhibitory neurons. Further, the NPY-Y1 pathway may offer a
potential therapeutic target in cerebrovascular disease.
DOI: 10.7554/eLife.14315.001
Uhlirova et al. eLife 2016;5:e14315. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.14315 1 of 23
RESEARCH ARTICLE
Introduction
In the past decade, the field of cerebral blood flow and metabolism has experienced a paradigm
shift with respect to neurovascular coupling mechanisms. An earlier ’metabolic’ hypothesis postulated that an increase in cerebral blood flow (CBF) in response to increased neuronal activity (a.k.a.
’functional hyperemia’) was directly related to energetic costs and driven by bi-products of energy
consumption (CO2, lactate, H+
, etc.) (reviewed in [Raichle and Mintun, 2006]). However, a growing
body of experimental evidence, including our own, indicates that while molecules produced by
increased energy metabolism do have a vasoactive effect, much of the acute CBF response in vivo
under healthy conditions is driven by vasoactive messengers related to neuronal signaling (for recent
reviews see [Kleinfeld et al., 2011; Cauli and Hamel, 2010; Buxton et al., 2014]). These messengers, released by specific cell types, actively regulate arteriolar diameters – a key control parameter
in the CBF response. Thus, activation of specific types of neurons (and potentially astrocytes) as
opposed to the undifferentiated spiking or synaptic activity is likely to determine the vascular
response.
Previous studies provided evidence for the involvement of both excitatory and inhibitory neurons
in CBF regulation. In Pyramidal cells (PCs), activation of N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptors has
been demonstrated to stimulate release of prostaglandin E2 produced by cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2)
causing an increase in CBF (Lacroix et al., 2015; Lecrux et al., 2011). In inhibitory neurons (INs) –
that can be further classified into subtypes based on their neurotransmitter/neuropeptide content,
shape, and neurophysiological properties (Markram et al., 2004) – release of neuropeptides and
nitric oxide (NO) has been hypothesized to provide a bidirectional CBF control (reviewed in
[Cauli and Hamel, 2010]). Indeed, experiments in cortical brain slices have demonstrated that stimulation of INs can cause dilation or constriction of arteriolar segments embedded in the sliced tissue
with the polarity of the effect depending on the INs cell type (Cauli et al., 2004; Perrenoud et al.,
2012). Further, selective optogenetic (OG) stimulation of INs in vivo was shown to increase CBF
(Anenberg et al., 2015).
On the level of single cortical arterioles, two-photon imaging studies have revealed that the
hemodynamic response to a sensory stimulus is composed of a combination of dilatory and
eLife digest Unlike other cells in the body, brain cells contain almost no energy reserves and
rely on blood vessels for continuous supply of oxygen. A change in the brain’s activity can cause
these blood vessels to either dilate or constrict, which alters the supply to match the change in
demand. However, it is not known which signals cause these changes in the blood vessels.
Previous studies have shown that individual blood vessels in an intact brain tend to dilate when
the brain’s activity increases, and constrict when brain activity is inhibited. However, these studies
were based on correlations, and there was no direct evidence that the inhibitory cells cause blood
vessels to constrict.
Uhlirova, Kılıc¸ et al. now provide such evidence. The experiments made use of mice that had
been genetically modified such that the excitatory or inhibitory nerve cells in their brains could be
selectively activated by shining a blue light on the brain’s surface. The vessels in the outer millimeter
of the gray matter of each mouse’s brain were imaged in detail, both before and after the blue light
was used to activate the nerve cells.
The experiments reveal that both excitatory and inhibitory nerve cells can cause blood vessels in
the brain to dilate. However, blood vessels in the brain will only constrict in response to inhibitory
nerve cells. Uhlirova, Kılıc¸ et al. went on to identify a molecule called Neuropeptide Y (or NPY short)
as a signal that triggers the constriction of the blood vessels. This signaling molecule is released by a
specific sub-type of inhibitory nerve cell and it binds to a receptor protein on the brain’s blood
vessels to make them constrict.
These findings suggest that NPY and its receptor on blood vessels may offer promising targets
for drugs to treat diseases of the brain’s blood vessels. Further studies are now needed to identify
the signals responsible for the dilation of blood vessels in the brain.
DOI: 10.7554/eLife.14315.002
Uhlirova et al. eLife 2016;5:e14315. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.14315 2 of 23
Research article Neuroscience
constrictive phases with the relative strength of vasoconstriction co-varying with that of neuronal
inhibition (Devor et al., 2007, 2008; Tian et al., 2010). However, direct evidence that activation of
INs can cause arteriolar vasoconstriction in vivo is missing. Therefore, in the present study, we asked
whether selective OG stimulation of INs can cause the biphasic dilation/constriction sequence characteristic of sensory-induced responses and whether the constriction phase was specific to activation
of INs rather than excitatory neurons. Our results confirm the ability of INs to drive the biphasic arteriolar response and provide the first in vivo evidence for the major role of the NPY-Y1 pathway mediating vasoconstriction.
Results
Sensory stimulation induces arteriolar dilation followed by constriction
with the fastest dilation onset below layer IV
Previously, we and others have shown that sensory stimuli in the primary somatosensory cortex (SI)
induced biphasic changes in arteriolar diameters – dilation followed by constriction – with the onset
and time-to-peak of dilation depending on the cortical depth (Tian et al., 2010; Lindvere et al.,
2013). In these studies, imaging was performed in the rat SI within the top ~500 mm (layers I-IV in
the rat SI), and the fastest dilation occurred at the deepest measurement locations. Since
Figure 1. Sensory stimulus-induced arteriolar response. (A) An example vascular image stack throughout the
cortical depth. Three 50-mm slabs at different depths are shown. Red arrows indicate the direction of flow in a
surface arteriole diving at 3 points. (B) Sensory stimulus-induced dilation time-courses sorted into two categories
by the presence or absence of the constriction phase, defined as the peak constriction amplitude exceeding 1%.
The black curve (constriction): n = 419 measurements, 34 subjects. The red curve (no constriction): n = 397
measurements, 47 subjects. Error bars indicate standard error (SE) across subjects. (C) Onset (black) and time-topeak (red) of dilation as a function of depth. Each data point represents a single measurement. For each subject,
the data were group-averaged according to depth in 100-mm bins. Error bars represent the mean ± SE across
subjects for each bin (green). (D) A zoomed-in view onto the initial eight seconds of the response. Time-courses
were grouped by depth as in (C) and peak-normalized (see Materials and methods) to facilitate visual inspection of
temporal differences. Color-coded depth categories are indicated on top.
DOI: 10.7554/eLife.14315.003
The following figure supplement is available for figure 1:
Figure supplement 1. Sensory stimulus-induced arteriolar response – additional quantification.
DOI: 10.7554/eLife.14315.004
Uhlirova et al. eLife 2016;5:e14315. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.14315 3 of 23
Research article Neuroscience
infragranular layers V and VI were not sampled, it remains unclear whether sensory-induced dilation
initiated in layer IV (which has the highest metabolic load [Sokoloff et al., 1977]) or below.
In the present study, we extended these measurements down to ~900 mm (layer VI) in the mouse
SI (Figure 1A). This was possible due to utilization of longer illumination wavelengths (see Materials
and methods) and higher transparency of the mouse cortex compared to the rat; this is due to
smaller diameter of the surface vessels attenuating light. The stimulus consisted of a 2-s train of electrical pulses (100 ms, 1 mA, 3 Hz) delivered to the contralateral forepaw. Fluorescein isothiocyanate
(FITC)-labeled dextran was injected intravenously to visualize the vasculature. Single-vessel diameter
measurements were performed at 866 locations along 120 diving arterioles and their branches (n =
320 branch measurements) in 49 wild type subjects at depths from 20 to 850 mm. Consistent with
our previous data, many of the measurements exhibited a biphasic arteriolar diameter change: dilation followed by constriction before returning to the baseline. To quantify the constriction amplitude, individual time-courses were temporally smoothed with a Gaussian kernel (FWHM = 0.5 s); the
peak constriction was determined as the minimum value within 3–13 s after the stimulus onset.
About half of the measurements showed constriction with the peak constriction amplitude exceeding 1% (Figure 1B and Figure 1—figure supplement 1A).
To quantify the dilation onset, we fit a straight line to the rising slope of the diameter increase
between 20 and 80% of the peak and calculated an intercept with the pre-stimulus baseline for each
measured time-course. There was a gradual decrease in the onset and time-to-peak throughout the
depth (p=1.8  106
and 2.3  106
, respectively; Figure 1C–D). The dilation amplitude varied
between measurement locations (Figure 1—figure supplement 1B,C).
These results are in agreement with our earlier observations in the rat SI, demonstrating biphasic
arteriolar diameter changes with depth-dependent dilation onset and peak. Novel to the present
study, these data show that the fastest dilation onset and rise occurs in deep cortical layers, below
layer IV.
OG stimulation of INs reproduces the biphasic arteriolar response
We imaged OG-induced single-vessel diameter changes in 17 VGAT-ChR2(H134R)-EYFP mice
(Zhao et al., 2011). Double immunofluorescence of ChR2-EYFP and GABA-producing glutamate
decarboxylase in this mouse line revealed a virtually complete overlap of staining in the SI confirming
that the ChR2-EYFP protein was indeed present only in GABAergic INs (Figure 2—figure supplement 1). The OG stimulus was delivered to the cortical surface through the objective using a cylinder-shaped 473-nm laser beam 230 mm in diameter (FWHM) (Figure 2A). Due to significant
absorption of light at this (blue) wavelength, the power of the beam was reduced by ~ 90% within
the first 200 mm, practically confining the direct effect of ChR2 opening to the top cortical layers
(Figure 2B). This number, obtained using a Monte Carlo simulation of photon migration in tissue
(Doronin and Meglinski, 2011, 2012), is consistent with previous experimental and theoretical findings (Yona et al., 2016; Aravanis et al., 2007; Foutz et al., 2012).
FITC-labeled dextran was injected intravenously to visualize the vasculature. We measured 93 diving arterioles within the forepaw area of SI at different depths: from 30 to 560 mm below the cortical
surface; 217 measured locations in total. At some locations, lateral branches were captured in the
same focal plane within <200 mm lateral distance from the trunk; 88 branch measurements in total.
Sensory stimulation – a 2-s train of electrical pulses (100 ms, 1 mA) delivered to a forepaw at 3 Hz –
was presented at one or more measurement locations to control for normal functional hyperemia.
As with the sensory stimulus, the OG stimulus elicited a biphasic vascular response: dilation followed by constriction before returning to the baseline (Figure 2C–D). When measured at the same
vessel location within the center of the forepaw area, the OG response featured a more pronounced
constriction phase compared to the sensory one (Figure 2D). The overall shape of the OG response
was only weakly sensitive to variation in the light pulse duration (200–430 ms) and intensity (0.7–2.8
mW) (Figure 2—figure supplement 2A–B). Thereafter, unless indicated, the stimulus consisted of a
pair of light pulses separated by 130 ms for 450-ms total stimulus duration. These stimulus parameters produced a robust response while allowing a measurement point in between the two pulses.
Averaged within a subject, 16 out of 17 OG time courses exhibited a clear constriction phase
(Figure 2E). Grouping dilation time-courses by depth revealed that the fastest dilation onset and
time-to-peak occurred at the deepest measurement locations (Figure 2F and Figure 2—figure supplement 2C). Indeed, the onset and time-to-peak gradually decreased with depth (p=1.2  103
Uhlirova et al. eLife 2016;5:e14315. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.14315 4 of 23
Research article Neuroscie
Figure 2. Arteriolar response to OG stimulation of INs. (A) Left: The 473-nm laser beam visualized in fluorescent medium. Right: Schematic illustration
of the OG beam centered on a diving arteriole. The full width at half maximum (FWHM = 230 mm) of the beam is superimposed on a mean intensity
projection (MIP) of a 2-photon image stack of FITC-labeled vasculature through the top 116 mm. Individual images were acquired every 3 mm. Red
arrows indicate the direction of flow in the arteriole. (B) Simulated spatial profile of the OG beam in cortical tissue. Top: Color-coded photon density.
Bottom: Photon density as a function of depth (z-axis) and as a function of the radial distance (r) at three different depths (75, 225, and 425 mm). (C) Left:
An example vascular MIP throughout the top 180 mm. Right: the measurement plane 180 mm deep including intravascular FITC (green) and SR101-
labeled astrocytes (red). The white line indicates the scanning trajectory used for diameter measurements in (D). (D) Diameter change time-courses of
the diving arteriole in (C) in response to the sensory and OG stimuli (sensory: black, average of 10 stimulus trials; OG: red, single trial). (E) Each thin
gray line shows an average response within one subject. Across-subject average is overlaid in thick black. Error bars indicate SE across subjects. The
mean peak dilation, peak constriction, and the ratio of peak dilation to peak constriction are shown in the inset. Error bars indicate SE across subjects.
(F) Averaged dilation time-courses grouped by depth. An expanded view of the initial 4 s after the stimulus onset is shown. The depth in mm is
indicated on the left. Error bars indicate SE across subjects. (G) Dilation onset (black) and time-to-peak (red) as a function of depth. Conventions are as
in Figure 1C. (H) As in (G) for constriction onset (see text).
DOI: 10.7554/eLife.14315.005
The following figure supplements are available for figure 2:
Figure supplement 1. GAD67/ChR2-EYFP immunostaining of the cortex from a VGAT-ChR2(H134R)-EYFP mouse.
DOI: 10.7554/eLife.14315.006
Figure supplement 2. Arteriolar response to OG stimulation of INs – additional quantification.
DOI: 10.7554/eLife.14315.007
Uhlirova et al. eLife 2016;5:e14315. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.14315 5 of 23
Research article Neuroscience
and 4  105
, respectively; Figure 2G). The linear regression slope for the onset was consistent with
dilation propagating upstream along diving arteriolar trunks at ~900 mm/s.
Next, we quantified the ’constriction onset’ as the time of transition from the dilatory to constrictive phase for each measurement location. Constriction onset also gradually decreased with depth
(p=6.4  106
) indicating that deeper dilation had faster decay succeeded by constriction
(Figure 2H). Deeper measurements exhibited a trend towards higher peak amplitude (Figure 2—
figure supplement 2D). This trend, however, was not statistically significant due to variation
between individual measurements. Finally, presenting the same OG stimulus in wild type animals did
not cause any detectable physiological changes (not shown), arguing against potential dilatory/constrictive effects of heat generated by the 473-nm laser within our range of the laser power
(Christie et al., 2012).
Taken together, these results show that selective stimulation of INs was able to reproduce the
biphasic dilation/constriction sequence characteristic of sensory-induced responses. As with the sensory responses, the initial OG-induced dilation occurred in deep cortical layers where it also had the
fastest rise and fastest decay superseded by constriction.
Vascular response to the OG stimulation of INs does not rely on
excitatory cells
In general, an increase in inhibition is expected to hyperpolarize postsynaptic cells reducing their
excitability. Hypothetically, however, indirect activation may be produced through disinhibition or
generation of a ’rebound’ action potential upon termination of the hyperpolarization (Bean, 2007).
This rebound mechanism is particularly relevant for deep PCs endowed with low threshold calcium
conductance (de la Pen˜a and Geijo-Barrientos, 1996). To control for these or any other unforeseen
effects of the OG stimulation on PC activity, we performed extracellular recordings of the Local Field
Potential (LFP) and Multi Unit Activity (MUA) in an additional 3 VGAT-ChR2(H134R)-EYFP subjects
(Figure 3). LFP in the cerebral cortex largely reflects flow of currents along the vertically aligned
PCs’ apical dendrites and, therefore, provides a reliable measure of PC activity (Buzsa´ki et al.,
2012; Einevoll et al., 2013). Our measurements revealed no LFP response timed to the termination
of the OG stimulus arguing against the presence of rebound spikes in PCs (Figure 3A). In addition,
Figure 3. Lack of excitatory recruitment upon OG stimulation of INs. (A) Top: Corresponding MUA (top trace) and
LFP (bottom tarce) recorded from layer II/III during a 200 ms OG stimulus. Each trace shows a single stimulus trial;
red traces show the average of four individual trials. (B) As in (A) for a 1 s long OG stimulus.
DOI: 10.7554/eLife.14315.008
The following figure supplements are available for figure 3:
Figure supplement 1. Lack of excitatory recruitment upon OG stimulation of INs – additional evidence from
calcium imaging.
DOI: 10.7554/eLife.14315.009
Figure supplement 2. Lack of excitatory recruitment upon OG stimulation of INs – additional pharmacological
evidence.
DOI: 10.7554/eLife.14315.010
Uhlirova et al. eLife 2016;5:e14315. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.14315 6 of 23
Research article Neuroscien
the ongoing (spontaneous) LFP activity was suppressed during the OG stimulus implying the hyperpolarization of PCs. The suppression effect was more obvious during longer OG stimuli (Figure 3B).
The MUA signal reflects spiking of all neurons, excitatory and inhibitory, within ~100 mm of the
electrode tip (Buzsa´ki, 2004; Einevoll et al., 2012; Pettersen and Einevoll, 2008). During the
ongoing activity, bursts of MUA coincided with downward deflections in LFP indicating participation
of PCs in these spontaneous events. The OG stimulus elicited a sharp and transient increase in MUA
timed to the stimulus onset (Figure 3). During prolonged OG stimulation, the initial transient MUA
response was followed by a desynchronized activity, starting ~200 ms after the stimulus onset and
lasting for the duration of the stimulus (Figure 3B). This MUA response in the presence of LFP suppression suggests firing of INs rather than PCs.
To provide further evidence that OG stimulation did not engage PCs, we performed in vivo calcium imaging in an additional 3 VGAT-ChR2(H134R)-EYFP subjects (Figure 3—figure supplement
1). PCs and INs were identified using structural reference images (Figure 3—figure supplement
1A–B, see Materials and methods). During spontaneous activity, the majority of imaged PCs exhibited characteristic calcium transients known to be associated with action potentials (AP) (Figure 3—
figure supplement 1C, left) (Grewe et al., 2010; Pnevmatikakis et al., 2016; Yaksi and Friedrich,
2006; Stosiek et al., 2003). In contrast, calcium transients in INs had variable kinetics and/or small
amplitude (Figure 3—figure supplement 1C, right). Poor quality of calcium signals in INs is consistent with previous reports and is likely to reflect low density of voltage-gated calcium channels and/
or higher calcium buffering capacity in INs (Langer and Helmchen, 2012; Kerlin et al., 2010).
Therefore, calcium imaging in INs may not provide enough sensitivity for the detection of single (or
a few) APs generated by the 5-ms OG stimulus. Indeed, the stimulus produced no detectable calcium increase (Figure 3—figure supplement 1C). To ensure that this stimulus was sufficient to elicit
firing, we recorded MUA activity right after acquisition of calcium imaging data. Despite the absence
of a calcium increase, there was a robust MUA response to every light pulse (Figure 3—figure supplement 1D). While the calcium imaging experiments failed to detect firing of INs, they provided
further evidence that PCs were not activated by OG stimulation. This is because no calcium increase
was detected in PCs in response to the OG stimulus, although spontaneous calcium transients were
readily detectable.
Taken together, these data demonstrate that indirect recruitment of PCs was unlikely to contribute to the OG-induced vascular responses. Furthermore, both the dilation and constriction phases of
the response were present after blocking glutamatergic synaptic transmission with AP5 (NMDA
receptor antagonist, 500 mM) and CNQX (AMPA/kainate receptor antagonist, 200 mM) (Figure 3—
figure supplement 2, see Materials and methods). These results are in agreement with a recent laser
speckle contrast imaging study in the same VGAT-ChR2(H134R)-EYFP mouse line, which concluded
that the effect of OG stimulation on CBF was independent on synaptic transmission
(Anenberg et al., 2015). Thus, arteriolar dilation and constriction in response to the OG stimulation
was a consequence of direct activation of INs expressing ChR2 with no reliance on excitatory cells.
Neurovascular mechanism induced by the OG stimulation of INs
requires spiking
At first glance, the finding that OG-induced dilation initiated below layer IV (Figure 2F–G) while the
473-nm light used to deliver the OG stimulus was practically confined to the top 200 mm is puzzling
(Figure 2B) (Aravanis et al., 2007; Foutz et al., 2012). However, a previous study using OG stimulation of layer V PCs has shown that stimulation at the cortical surface was effective in inducing firing
of cell bodies located in layer V (Beltramo et al., 2013). Similar to PCs, some subtypes of INs (with
bipolar, bitufted, double-bouquet, Martinotti-like morphologies [Markram et al., 2004]) span across
the cortical depth with the top part of their dendritic and/or axonal arbor residing in the upper cortical layers. Therefore, we hypothesized that opening of ChR2 channels in these superficial neuronal
processes could be sufficient to cause depolarization throughout the cell triggering release of vasoactive agents below the penetration limit of blue light in tissue, either from axonal terminals or via
dendritic exocytosis (Merighi et al., 2011).
The superficial processes undergoing depolarization due to opening of ChR2 could be axons,
dendrites, or both. Structural 2-photon imaging in the VGAT-ChR2(H134R)-EYFP mouse showed that
EYFP (and, therefore, ChR2) was present in the somas and processes of INs across cortical layers
(Figure 4A). Each EYFP-positive neuron had a number of processes emanating from the cell body
Uhlirova et al. eLife 2016;5:e14315. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.14315 7 of 23
Research article Neuroscience
consistent with the presence of ChR2 in the dendrites. Axonal labeling, however, could not be determined from these data.
First, we examined the possibility of ChR2 opening in the superficial axons. Assuming that ChR2
was indeed present in the axons, we reasoned that depolarization of these axons could be sufficient
for triggering antidromic APs (Schoenenberger et al., 2008) coupling the surface illumination to the
release of vasoactive messengers in deep layers. In this case, we predicted that the vasoactive effect
would be abolished by blocking APs and rescued by delivering the OG light stimulus directly to layer
V (i.e., bypassing the need for antidromic APs as the means of communication). To test this hypothesis, we topically applied 50 mM of tetrodotoxin (TTX), a blocker of Na+
channels required for generation and propagation of APs (n = 3 subjects). TTX abolished both the dilation and constriction
Figure 4. The effect of OG stimulation of INs delivered directly to layer V. (A) Representative images of EYFPexpressing INs at different depths (green – INs labeled with EYFP, red – astrocytes labeled with SR101).
(B) Arteriolar response to OG stimulation of INs through the objective before and after TTX (black and red curves,
respectively). Error bars indicate SE across subjects. (C) As in (B) for OG stimulation through the optical fiber with
the tip in layer V. The inset shows the light-emitting fiber tip visualized in fluorescent medium. (D) Left: Example
morphology of VIP-positive inhibitory neuron (ID=NMO_06142, NeuroMorpho.org). The red double ended arrow
indicates the dendritic section that was stretched to approximate layer V neuron (see Materials and methods).
Right: dendritic (top) and somatic (bottom) membrane potential in response to voltage clamping the top 50-, 100-
or 150 mm of the dendritic tree at 0 mV. (E) Comparison of the arteriolar response (across-subject average) to OG
stimulation of INs through the objective (black) and fiber (red). Error bars represent SE across subjects. The inset
shows the mean laser power for each category (left) and a zoomed-in view onto the initial 4 s after the stimulus
onset of the response normalized by the laser power (right).
DOI: 10.7554/eLife.14315.011
The following figure supplements are available for figure 4:
Figure supplement 1. Simulation of the somatic membrane potential – another example.
DOI: 10.7554/eLife.14315.012
Figure supplement 2. Approximation of neuronal morphologies.
DOI: 10.7554/eLife.14315.013
Uhlirova et al. eLife 2016;5:e14315. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.14315 8 of 23
Research article Neuroscience
response phase at all depths (Figure 4B). Next, we used a tapered optical fiber (see Materials and
methods) positioned with the light-emitting tip ~600 mm below the surface (layer V). Under control
conditions, OG stimulation through the fiber induced the characteristic biphasic arteriolar response
(Figure 4C, black curve). In the presence of TTX, however, both the dilation and constriction phase
were lost (n = 3 subjects) (Figure 4C, red curve).
The failure to rescue the response in the presence of TTX while delivering light directly to layer V
argues against antidromic APs as the means of communication between the surface excitation and
deep dilation onset. These results also imply that, in the absence of spikes, dendritic depolarization
was insufficient to induce vascular responses arguing for release of vasoactive agents from axonal
terminals rather than via dendritic exocytosis. In addition, these results indicate that the density of
ChR2 in axonal terminals was insufficient to drive the release directly, i.e., due to the depolarization
and calcium influx resulting from opening of ChR2 in these terminals. Thus, (1) spikes were required
to enable release of vasoactive agents, and (2) the communication of the surface excitation to deep
release likely occurred via propagation of depolarization along dendrites rather than axons.
The dilation phase is likely to be mediated by bipolar INs with
superficial dendrites and deep axons
In contrast to axons that support regenerative propagation of APs, dendritic depolarization decays
with distance. Therefore, first we asked whether depolarization of superficial dendrites in INs could,
in principle, drive the soma, located in layer V, above its firing threshold. To address this question,
we computed membrane potential in morphologically reconstructed INs. Specifically, we chose
bipolar INs positive for Vasoactive Intestinal Peptide (VIP). This choice was motivated by the desired
orientation of the dendritic and axonal arbors in VIP-positive INs (Kawaguchi and Kubota, 1996)
(Figure 4D and Figure 4—figure supplement 1) as well as the known vasodilatory properties of VIP
(Cauli et al., 2004, 2014).
Reconstructed VIP-positive neurons were obtained from the NeuroMorpho.Org (Ascoli et al.,
2007) (see Materials and methods). We computed the membrane potential at the soma in response
to a step depolarization (’voltage clamp’) of the upper part of their dendritic tree. All computations
were carried out in the Neuron simulation environment (Hines and Carnevale, 1997). We assumed
passive membrane properties and clamped the voltage of the top 50-, 100- or 150-mm slab of the
dendritic tree to 0 mV, which is the reversal potential of ChR2 (Nagel et al., 2003). For all three conditions, we observed a strong depolarization of the soma that developed within ~50 ms. The steady
state depolarization reached values between 40 to 50 mV, depending on the number of dendritic
branches within the clamped region, comparable to the reported 43.7 mV average firing threshold
for VIP-positive neurons (Neske et al., 2015) (Figure 4D). In reality, dendritic membranes of INs possess active ionic conductances (reviewed in [Cauli et al., 2014]) enhancing the coupling of dendritic
excitation to generation of spikes. Therefore, our calculation underestimates the achievable somatic
depolarization. Thus, we conclude that depolarization of the upper dendrites in bipolar INs can drive
spikes in somas located as deep as layer V.
The need to overcome the decay of depolarization along the dendrite implies that OG stimulation delivered directly to layer V should be more effective in inducing the vascular response compared to stimulation from the surface. To test this hypothesis, we made paired measurements in
response to stimulation through the objective and fiber (positioned with the light-emitting tip
~600 mm below the surface) at each measured location (n = 30 locations along 4 arterioles in an
additional 3 subjects, within 50–500 mm depth range). The stimulus consisted of a single light pulse
(330–430 ms duration). Figure 4E shows the vascular responses, averaged across subjects, for each
condition and the corresponding laser power. Normalized by the laser power, the peak dilation in
response to the fiber was roughly twice as large as that in response to stimulation through the objective (Figure 4E, inset). Thus, initiation of dilation below layer IV in response to OG light at the cortical surface could be explained by depolarization of the superficial dendrites leading to firing of the
soma (situated as deep as in layer V) and release of vasoactive agents from deep axons.
The constriction phase is mediated by Y1 receptors for Neuropeptide Y
During the hemodynamic response to a sensory stimulus, the relative strength of arteriolar constriction in SI covaries with that of neuronal inhibition (Devor et al., 2007, 2008). Thus, neurovascular
Uhlirova et al. eLife 2016;5:e14315. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.14315 9 of 23
Research article Neuroscie
mechanism(s) governing arteriolar constriction may be specific to activation of INs rather than excitatory neurons. To test this hypothesis, we employed Thy1-ChR2-YFP (line 18) mice where expression
of ChR2 is limited to layer V PCs (Arenkiel, 2007). Excitation of PCs can engage other cell types
because glutamate released from PCs causes depolarization and firing of postsynaptic neurons. For
that reason, we applied blockers of glutamatergic synaptic transmission (AP5 and CNQX, see Materials and methods) to avoid indirect activation of neuronal cell types other than PCs. Under control
conditions, OG stimulation in Thy1-ChR2-YFP mice (using a single light pulse of 50–80 ms duration)
elicited a biphasic arteriolar diameter change consisting of the initial dilation followed by constriction
(n = 2 subjects, 28 measurement locations along 13 arterioles within 40–380 mm depth range;
Figure 5A, black). However, only dilation was observed in the presence of the glutamatergic blockers (Figure 5A, red). Thus, indirect activation of postsynaptic neurons accounted for the constriction
phase. Taken together with the VGAT-ChR2(H134R)-EYFP data, these results indicate that both INs
and PCs could drive dilation while constriction was selective to activation of INs.
Which subtype of INs mediates the constriction phase? Previous studies have demonstrated constriction of cortical arterioles following activation of NPY-positive INs in brain slices and during perfusion of the slice chamber (or isolated vessels) with NPY (Cauli et al., 2004; Perrenoud et al., 2012;
Dacey et al., 1988). Further, NPY-Y1 receptors are known to be expressed by cortical microarterioles (Abounader et al., 1999; Bao et al., 1997). Motivated by these reports, we tested the effect
of a Y1 antagonist BIBP 3226 on the constriction phase of vascular responses elicited by the OG
stimulation in 3 VGAT-ChR2(H134R)-EYFP subjects. Topical application of 100 mM of the antagonist
largely abolished the constriction phase of the OG response without a significant effect on the peak
dilation amplitude (n = 52 locations along 25 diving arterioles at depths from 50 to 590 mm)
(Figure 5B).
Next, we tested the effect of the same pharmacological treatment on dilation in response to the
sensory stimulus. Sensory stimulus-induced dilation was measured at 10 locations along 7 diving
arterioles in 4 additional wild type subjects at depths from 130 to 490 mm. At each location, measurements were performed before and after the topical application of 100 mM of BIBP 3226.
Figure 5C shows the averaged time-courses before and after BIBP 3226 (black and red, respectively). For vessels exhibiting a clear biphasic response, the constriction phase was abolished by BIBP
Figure 5. Neurovascular mechanism of the constriction phase. (A) Arteriolar response to OG stimulation of PCs in
Thy1-ChR2-YFP subjects before (black) and after (red) application of AMPA/NMDA glutamatergic blockers (black
and red, respectively). Error bars represent SE across subjects. The inset shows the sensory response before and
after drug application (500 mM AP5 + 200 mM CNQX). (B) Comparison of dilation time-courses in response to OG
stimulation of INs in VGAT-ChR2(H134R)-EYFP subjects before (black) and after (red) blocking Y1 receptors for
NPY with topical application of 100 mM of BIBP 3226. Error bars represent SE across subjects. (C) As in (B) for the
sensory response. The data were grouped according to the presence of the constriction phase as in Figure 1B.
DOI: 10.7554/eLife.14315.014
Uhlirova et al. eLife 2016;5:e14315. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.14315 10 of 23
Research article Neuroscience
3226 without a significant effect on the peak dilation amplitude (Figure 5C, left). For vessels exhibiting monophasic dilation, there was a trend towards higher dilation amplitude after BIBP 3226
(Figure 5C, right). This trend, however, was not significant.
These results are consistent with prior demonstrations in brain slices that dilation and constriction
are mediated by different types of INs (Cauli and Hamel, 2010; Cauli et al., 2004;
Perrenoud et al., 2012). We conclude that the constrictive effect elicited by both the OG and sensory stimuli was driven by NPY – presumably released from NPY-positive INs (Karagiannis et al.,
2009) – acting on Y1 receptors.
Biphasic arteriolar response to sensory and OG stimuli in the absence
of anesthesia
Anesthesia can differentially affect neuronal cell types altering neuronal network activity and neurovascular coupling. To this end, we performed two-photon imaging of single diving arterioles in
awake mice, i.e., in the absence of general anesthesia or any sedative drugs (see Materials and
methods). The sensory stimulus consisted of three gentle air puffs onto the whisker pad (100-ms
puffs delivered at 3 Hz). Diving arterioles within the whisker pad representation of SI (i.e., Barrel cortex) displayed readily detectable biphasic arteriolar responses to the sensory stimuli consisting of
dilation followed by a smaller amplitude constriction (n = 4 subjects, 11 measurement locations
along 11 arterioles within 30–120 mm depth range; Figure 6A top, black). The overall response duration was shorter than that in the anesthetized subjects (Figure 1B), most likely due to differences in
the stimulus duration and strength (1-s train of air puffs in awake vs. 2-s train of electrical pulses
under anesthesia). In addition, awake subjects exhibited a secondary dilation of smaller amplitude
10–15 s after the stimulus onset, likely reflecting cognitive processing and, in some cases, active
whisking following the sensory stimulus.
Next, we performed measurements in awake VGAT-ChR2(H134R)-EYFP subjects in response to
OG stimulation of INs (n = 3 subjects, 11 measurement locations along 10 arterioles within 30–
120 mm depth range; Figure 6A bottom, red). The stimulus consisted of a single light pulse (150–
400 ms duration). Similar to the response under anesthesia, the OG stimulus induced biphasic arteriolar diameter changes with more pronounced constriction compared to the sensory response
(Figure 6B). These results rule out the possibility that the constriction phase could be an epiphenomenon of anesthesia establishing the biphasic dilation/constriction sequence as a normal feature of
the hemodynamic response at the level of parenchymal arterioles.
Figure 6. Imaging arteriolar response to sensory and OG stimulation of INs in awake mice. (A) Arteriolar dilation
in awake mice in response to a sensory stimulus (three 100-ms air puffs to the contralateral whisker pad, top panel)
and OG stimulation of INs (bottom panel). Thin gray lines represent individual subjects. Across-subject averages
are overlaid (thick black and red lines for the sensory and OG stimuli, respectively). (B) Overlaid dilation timecourses in response to sensory stimulation (black) and OG stimulation of INs (red). Error bars represent SE across
subjects. The inset shows the same time-courses normalized to the peak.
DOI: 10.7554/eLife.14315.015
Uhlirova et al. eLife 2016;5:e14315. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.14315 11 of 23
Research article Neuroscience
Discussion
A key goal in neurovascular research is establishing molecular mechanisms mediating dilation and
constriction of the brain microvasculature driven by changes in neuronal activity. In the present
study, we used optogenetics to isolate the mechanisms originating from the inhibitory (GABAergic)
population of cortical neurons. We demonstrate that OG stimulation elicited a biphasic diameter
change composed of a combination of dilatory and constrictive phases. While dilation was also
induced by OG stimulation of PCs, the constriction response was specific to activation of INs. Further, we identified the vasoconstrictive molecular agent as NPY acting on Y1 receptors and showed
that the same NPY-Y1 pathway was responsible for the sensory stimulus-induced vasoconstriction.
This finding supports previous observations in brain slices implicating NPY-positive INs as the primary mediators of vasoconstriction in cortical arterioles under normal conditions (Cauli et al., 2004;
Perrenoud et al., 2012).
Previously, we reported the center-surround and contra-ipsilateral patterns of arteriolar diameter
changes in SI in response to a sensory stimulus that were dominated by dilation within the receptive
field and constriction in the surrounding region as well as in the ipsilateral to the stimulus hemisphere (Devor et al., 2005, 2007, 2008). The strength of constriction in these studies correlated
with the strength of inhibition. In contrast to natural behavior of cortical circuits where specific types
of INs play a differential role in ’local’ and ’lateral’ inhibition (Helmstaedter et al., 2009), OG stimulation of INs in the present study produced indiscriminate activation across various inhibitory cell
types. Therefore, arteriolar responses to the OG stimulation cannot be directly compared to the
results from these previous studies. However, the finding of the NPY-Y1 pathway underlying constriction predicts that NPY-positive INs may be specifically involved in shaping the surround and ipsilateral neuronal inhibition.
OG stimulation in the VGAT-ChR2(H134R)-EYFP line produced a monophasic CBF increase in a
recent laser speckle contrast imaging study by Anenberg et al. (Anenberg et al., 2015). Arteriolar
constriction, however, would normally result in a CBF decrease, as we demonstrated previously
(Devor et al., 2007, 2008). We speculate that the high-frequency stimulation protocol used by
Anenberg and colleagues may have contributed to the lack of constriction and CBF decrease in their
study. In contrast to other types of INs driving dilation, at least some NPY-positive neurons exhibit a
pronounced spike latency (Karagiannis et al., 2009) and thus may not respond well to short (5-ms
duration) light pulses delivered at high frequency (100 Hz).
Prior studies on neuropeptides in different brain areas have demonstrated that the release could
occur from axonal terminals as well as via dendritic exocytosis (Merighi et al., 2011). In the present
study, OG stimulation of ChR2-expressing dendrites and somas under TTX was not effective in causing vascular responses while delivering the stimulating light either to the cortical surface or deep
layers. These results suggest that the corresponding vasoactive agents, including NPY, were
released from axons rather than via dendritic exocytosis, while spikes were required to drive the
release. Yet, we cannot rule out a possibility of dendritic release induced by back-propagating APs
(Stuart and Sakmann, 1994). Indeed, back-propagating APs have been reported in bipolar, bitufted
and neurogliaform INs (Goldberg et al., 2003; Kaiser et al., 2001; Cho et al., 2010).
The requirement for spiking during the OG response should not be interpreted in the context of
the ’classical’ question of whether it is the spiking or synaptic activity that correlates better with
BOLD fMRI. Historically, this question was motivated by the idea of a metabolic feedback, postulating that CBF increase was mechanistically related to the accumulation of vasoactive energy metabolites (Raichle and Mintun, 2006). The present results, on the other hand, demonstrate a feed
forward mechanism where specific vasoactive signaling agents released by active neurons drive dilation and constriction, depending on neuronal cell type. Further, the initial dilation in our experiments
occurred in infragranular layers and not in layer IV, which is the most metabolic layer in SI
(Sokoloff et al., 1977). These findings do not contradict the fact that some of the energy metabolites are vasoactive (Gordon et al., 2008). Rather, they suggest that, under healthy conditions in vivo
it is the vasoactive messengers related to neuronal signaling and not energy metabolites that play
the dominant role in CBF regulation.
The identity of vasodilatory mechanisms induced by OG stimulation of INs requires further investigation. Previous studies put forward a number of possibilities including release of VIP and NO
(Cauli and Hamel, 2010; Liu et al., 2012). The present results indicate that INs mediating dilation
Uhlirova et al. eLife 2016;5:e14315. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.14315 12 of 23
Research article Neuroscience
may have bipolar morphologies with dendrites extending to the surface and axons reaching to deep
cortical layers. VIP-positive INs meet these morphological criteria, and some of them co-express neuronal nitric oxide synthase (Kawaguchi and Kubota, 1996; Cauli et al., 2014; Perrenoud et al.,
2012). These features as well as known vasodilatory properties of VIP (Cauli et al., 2004, 2014) put
forward VIP-positive INs as a primary suspect initiating dilation in deep layers. Future experiments
using restricted expression of OG actuators/inhibitors in sub-populations of INs with known repertoire of vasoactive signaling molecules would be required to comprehensively address this
hypothesis.
It is well established that dilation and constriction can propagate along arteriolar walls (Segal and
Duling, 1986; Rosenblum et al., 1990; Jensen and Holstein-Rathlou, 2013; Chen et al., 2014;
Peppiatt et al., 2006; Welsh and Segal, 1998), and these conducted responses may have contributed to the spread of OG dilation and constriction throughout the cortical depth in our data. This
possibility is consistent with the observed slowing down of dilation kinetics towards the cortical surface and the trend towards a gradual decrease in the peak amplitude – this type of behavior is
expected for a decaying propagated response (Iadecola et al., 1997; Chen et al., 2011). These
findings, however, do not imply that neurovascular coupling mechanisms reside exclusively in deep
cortical layers and do not rule out local lamina-specific neurovascular communication at every depth.
In the presence of both local and conducted signaling, the onset of dilation would be determined by
the faster of the two processes. Therefore, substantial delays in the superficial arteriolar branches
suggest that local neurovascular communication in the upper layers, if it exists, has slower kinetics.
The observed gradual decrease of the dilation latency and time-to-peak down to the infragranular
layers is in agreement with laminar resolved functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) in human
(Siero et al., 2011) but at odds with a recent high resolution fMRI in the rat that used a line-scanning
method (Yu et al., 2014). The apparent discrepancy with Yu et al. (2014) may reflect the complex
nature of the Blood Oxygenation Level Dependent (BOLD) fMRI signal that depends on the balance
between O2 delivery and consumption as well as on the measurement theory specific to the chosen
data acquisition paradigm. Our present conclusions, on the other hand, rely on direct and assumption-free measurements of the physiological parameter of interest – the arteriolar diameter.
Astrocytic contribution to either dilation or constriction evoked by the OG stimulation of INs was
not specifically addressed in the current study. A number of recent reports including our own have
provided negative evidence for the involvement of calcium-dependent release of vasoactive gliotransmitters in normal regulation of cortical blood flow by local neuronal activity (Nizar et al., 2013;
Bonder and McCarthy, 2014; Takata et al., 2013; Jego et al., 2014). However, we cannot rule out
calcium-independent pathways. Expression of Y1 receptors has been documented in astrocytic cultures (Abounader et al., 1999); although, more recent transcriptomic analyses of astrocytes isolated
from adult mouse brains have revealed little or no expression of these receptors (Tasic et al., 2016;
Cahoy et al., 2008).
The present study has a number of limitations. As such, the pattern of OG stimulation in space
and time did not mimic naturally occurring neuronal activity. In addition, the possible variation in the
level of ChR2 expression could have resulted in bias towards specific INs cell types. The design of
our OG study, however, did not rely on natural or balanced neuronal activity patterns. Instead, our
major goal was to produce artificially selective activation of cortical INs as a single population for isolation of their vasoactive effects. Another potential pitfall is that OG stimulation of INs could lead to
an indirect recruitment of PCs, which have been implicated in regulation of blood flow
(Lecrux et al., 2011). However, our electrophysiological recordings and calcium imaging data produced no evidence for PC recruitment. Finally, the majority of the experiments in our study were
performed under anesthesia and in the presence of a paralytic agent that could have affected the
vasoreactivity and neurovascular coupling. As such, the ketamine/xylazine anesthesia employed by
Anenberg et al. (Anenberg et al., 2015) may provide an additional explanation for the discrepancy
in our results regarding the constriction phase in response to OG stimulation of INs. Stepping away
from anesthesia is an ongoing effort in many laboratories, including our own, but still remains a challenge for studies that require pharmacological manipulations, insertion of recording electrodes, and
deep imaging. In the present study, we have confirmed the biphasic nature of the arteriolar diameter
change in awake mice, both in response to a sensory stimulus and OG activation of INs.
The constrictive effect of INs demonstrated in the present study, taken together with previous
theoretical calculations suggesting that inhibition has lower metabolic costs than excitation
Uhlirova et al. eLife 2016;5:e14315. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.14315 13 of 23
Research article Neuroscience
(Attwell and Laughlin, 2001, 2002), raises the possibility that paired CBF and cerebral metabolic
rate of O2 (CMRO2) measurements can provide information about the net respective contributions
of excitatory and inhibitory activity within the ensemble neuronal network response, due to their differential vasoactive role and energetic costs. This possibility is of particular interest for the quantitative BOLD fMRI approach (a.k.a. the “calibrated BOLD”) that combines the BOLD and arterial spin
labeling (ASL) methods to isolate the effects of CBF and CMRO2 (Davis et al., 1998; Hoge, 2012;
Pike, 2012). Thus, we are tempted to speculate that identifying the CBF and CMRO2 effects induced
by excitatory and inhibitory neurons could open a new direction in which quantitative fMRI may be
able to provide information on the underlying neuronal activity.
Materials and methods
Animal procedures for imaging under anesthesia
All experimental procedures were performed in accordance with the guidelines established by the
UCSD Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC). We used 103 adult mice of either sex
including 48 VGAT-ChR2(H134R)-EYFP and 2 Thy1-ChR2-YFP (using promoters from Slc32a1 and
Thy1 genes, respectively; Jackson Stock Numbers 014548 and 007612, respectively; both heterozygous on a mixed C57Bl6/ICR background), and 53 wild type ICR. Surgical procedures in mice
expressing ChR2 were performed in a dark room using a 515 nm longpass filter (Semrock FF01-515/
LP-25) in the surgical microscope light source to avoid OG stimulation during installation of the cortical window. Mice were anesthetized with isoflurane during surgical procedures (2% initially, 0.5–1%
during all procedures). A cannula was inserted into the femoral artery. A metal holding bar was
glued to the temporal bone for immobilization of the head during imaging. An area of skull overlying
the forepaw region of the primary somatosensory cortex (SI) contralateral to the holding bar was
exposed and dura mater removed. A ~2  2 mm cranial window was centered on stereotactic coordinates: AP -0.5, ML 2.25.
In the majority of experiments, the red fluorescent dye sulforhodamine 101 (SR101, S7635, Sigma)
in artificial CSF (ACSF) was applied topically for ~2 min to label astrocytes (Nimmerjahn et al.,
2004) providing a contrast in tissue that was used for visual assessment of potential damage due to
experimental procedures. ACSF contained 142 mM NaCl, 5 mM KCl, 10 mM glucose, 10 mM
HEPES, 3.1 mM CaCl2, 1.3 mM MgCl2, pH 7.4. The excess dye was washed with ACSF. A drop of
agarose (1% wt/vol, A9793, Sigma) in ACSF was applied on the brain surface, and the exposure was
covered with a round glass coverslip (5 mm, WPI) and sealed with dental acrylic. To avoid herniation
of the exposed brain due to excessive intracranial pressure, the dura mater over the IVth cerebral
ventricle was punctured, thus allowing drainage of CSF. After the exposure was closed, the drainage
hole was sealed with agarose.
In experiments involving pharmacological manipulations, calcium imaging, or insertion of an optical fiber, the round glass coverslip was cut straight on one side facing a gap in the dental acrylic
seal. The agar was cut down along the cut side forming a vertical wall. The exposure was aligned
with the agar wall such that ACSF under the objective was in direct contact with the cortical surface
allowing drugs to penetrate into the cortical tissue.
After closing of the exposure, mice were left to rest under 1% isoflurane for 45 min. Then, isoflurane was discontinued and anesthesia maintained with a-chloralose (50 mg/kg/h IV, C0128, Sigma or
100459, MP Biochemicals). Mice were paralyzed with pancuronium bromide (0.4 mg/kg/h IV, P1918,
Sigma) (Shin et al., 2007) and ventilated (~110 min-1) with 30% O2 in air. Fluorescein isothiocyanate
(FITC)-labeled dextran (MW = 2 MDa, FD-2000S, Sigma) was injected IV (50–100 ml of 5% (w/v) solution in phosphate-buffered saline) to visualize the vasculature and control for the integrity of capillary
bed. Expired CO2 was measured continuously using a micro-capnometer (Cl240, Columbus instruments). Heart rate, blood pressure, and body temperature were monitored continuously. Blood gas
was analyzed to cross-validate the micro-capnometer measurements. Respiration was adjusted to
achieve PaCO2 between 30 and 40 mmHg and pH between 7.35 and 7.45. a-chloralose and pancuronium in 5% dextrose saline were supplied through the femoral line every 30 min for the duration
of data acquisition. Waiting for 45 min between closing of the exposure and drug injections minimized leakage of the drugs onto the exposed cortical tissue through the cut dural blood vessels.
Uhlirova et al. eLife 2016;5:e14315. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.14315 14 of 23
Research article Neuroscience
For calcium imaging experiments, calcium indicator Oregon Green 488 BAPTA-1 AM (OGB1) (O6807, Invitrogen, 50 mg) was first dissolved in 4 ml of 20% pluronic in DMSO (F-127, Invitrogen);
80 ml of ACSF were added to the OGB1 solution to yield a final concentration of 0.5 mM OGB1. The
microinjection pipette was guided under the glass coverslip and positioned ~ 200 mm below the cortical surface using a Luigs & Neumann translation stage (380FM-U) and manipulation equipment integrated into the Ultima system. The red fluorescent dye Alexa 594 (A-10442, Alexa Fluor 594
hydrazide, sodium salt, Invitrogen) was added to the OGB1 solution in order to visualize the micropipette during manipulation and to provide visual feedback during pressure-microinjection into the
cortical tissue (Stosiek et al., 2003). The pressure was manually adjusted to ensure visible spread of
Alexa 594 while avoiding movement artifacts.
Animal procedures for imaging awake mice
We used a Polished, Reinforced Thinned-Skull (PoRTS) technique (Drew et al., 2010) for installation
of chronic ’cortical windows’ providing sufficient visibility for imaging of diameter changes in single
diving arterioles down to ~120 mm below the surface. During the PoRTS procedure, mice were anesthetized with isoflurane (2% initially followed by 1% during the surgery); their body temperature was
maintained at 37˚C. A custom holding bar allowing repeated head immobilization was glued to the
skull overlaying the left hemisphere. On the right side, a ~3 3 mm area of skull was thinned until
translucent and polished with silicon carbide grit powder (Convington Engineering). The exposure
was centered on the Barrel cortex region of SI using stereotactic coordinates: AP 1.5, ML 2. A glass
coverslip was glued to the thinned skull and fixed along the perimeter with dental acrylic. Additional
dental acrylic was applied around the holding bar joining to the perimeter of the coverslip in order
to reinforce the overall assembly.
After surgical implantation of the bar and a full day recovery, mice were habituated in 1 session/
day to accept increasingly longer periods of head restraint under the microscope objective (up to
2 hr). During the head restraint, the animal was placed on a suspended bed. A drop of sweetened
condensed milk was offered every 15 min during the fixation as a reward. Habituated head-fixed
mice consumed the reward milk. They were free to readjust their body position and from time to
time displayed natural grooming behavior. A video camera (Lifecam Studio, Microsoft; IR filter
removed) with an NIR longpass filter (Midwest Optical LP920-25.5) was used for continuous observation of the mouse. The IR illumination (M940L3 - IR (940 nm) LED, Thorlabs) was invisible for the
PMT photodetectors and generated no imaging artifacts. The camera frames were synchronized
with two-photon imaging and recorded. Periods with extensive body movement (e.g., grooming
behavior) were excluded during data analysis.
Sensory stimulation
In experiments under anesthesia, sensory stimulation was delivered to the forepaw contralateral to
cortical exposure through a pair of thin needles inserted under the skin using a train of six 100 ms, 1-
mA electrical pulses at 3 Hz. This stimulus paradigm was chosen because it produced synchronized
neuronal spiking response accompanied by robust dilation with a sharp onset (Devor et al., 2008;
Tian et al., 2010; Nizar et al., 2013). All measurements in response to the sensory stimulus were
performed within a 1-mm radius from the center of the forepaw region of SI determined by the stereotactic coordinates (AP 0.5, ML 2.25). Ten stimulus trials were averaged at each measurement
location.
In awake mice, sensory stimulus consisted of a train of three air puffs onto the whiskers contralateral to the cortical window. We used three 100-ms puffs at 3 Hz delivered through a plastic tube
(2 mm inner diameter). The tube was positioned behind the whiskers to minimize the eye blink
reflex. Seven to nine stimulus trials were averaged at each measurement location.
Stimulation devices (A365 stimulus isolator or PV830 picopump, WPI) were triggered using a separate PC that also acquired timing signals for data acquisition (’trigger out’ signals for each frame/
line) and physiological readings using a National Instruments IO DAQ interface (PCI-6229) controlled
by custom-written software in MATLAB (MathWorks Inc.). The timing of each frame/line relative to
the stimulus onset was determined during data analysis based on acquired triggering signals.
Uhlirova et al. eLife 2016;5:e14315. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.14315 15 of 23
Research article Neuroscienc
OG stimulation
OG stimulation was delivered though the objective using a 473-nm cylinder-shaped laser beam
~230 mm in diameter (FWHM) (Figure 2A–B) that is comparable to the size of a cortical column. The
spatial distribution of the photon density in tissue produced by the OG beam (Figure 2B) was estimated using Monte Carlo simulation of photon migration in tissue (Doronin and Meglinski,
2011, 2012) assuming the following cortical gray matter optical parameters at 473 nm: absorption
coefficient ma = 0.2 mm1
, scattering coefficient ms = 68 mm1
, and anisotropy factor g = 0.95
(Flock et al., 1992). The beam was centered on a diving arteriole using a dedicated set of galvanometer mirrors. The duration of the light pulse was controlled by a dedicated shutter and synchronized
with imaging. Only a single OG trial was presented at each measurement location to avoid
overstimulation.
In some experiments, the 473-nm beam was coupled to a tapered optical fiber inserted in the
cortical tissue (Pisanello et al., 2014). Tapered optical fibers were purchased from Nanonics Imaging
Ltd. (MM-UV fiber for 200–1200 nm wavelengths, core diameter 50 mm, cladding diameter 125 mm,
250 mm protective acrylate buffer coating (except 2–3 mm from the tip), core refractive index 1.464,
cladding refractive index 1.447, numerical aperture 0.22, taper angle between 3˚ and 6˚
, Cr-Au
reflective coating thickness 300 nm, aperture diameter at taper tip ~200 nm).
Tapering of the fiber was critical to minimize tissue damage during penetration (Pisanello et al.,
2014). To generate a larger ’blob’ of light in deep cortical layers while retaining the needle shape
necessary for smooth penetration, we etched 200 mm of the coating from the tip (custom modification by Nanonics). The resultant beam profile is shown in Figure 4C. The fiber was guided under the
glass coverslip and positioned using Luigs and Neumann translation stage (380FM-U) and manipulation equipment integrated into the Ultima system.
Two-photon imaging
Images were obtained using an Ultima two-photon laser scanning microscopy system from Bruker
Fluorescence Microscopy (formerly Prairie Technologies) equipped with an Ultra II femtosecond Ti:
Sapphire laser (Coherent) tuned between 800–1000 nm. For penetration deeper than ~600 mm, an
Optical Parametric Oscillator (Chameleon Compact OPO, Coherent), pumped by the same Ti:Sapphire laser, was tuned to 1360 nm. The OPO was used in conjunction with the intravascular administration of dextran-conjugated Alexa Fluor 680 (D34680, Invitrogen) (Kobat et al., 2009). FITC and
Alexa Fluor 680 were imaged using cooled GaAsP detectors (Hamamatsu, H7422P-40). SR101 was
imaged using a multialkali PMT (Hamamatsu, R3896).
In experiments involving OG stimulation, the main dichroic mirror contained a 460–480 nm notch
(Chroma ZT470/561/NIR TPC). An additional filter blocking wavelengths in the range 458–473 nm
(Chroma ZET458-473/561/568/NIR M) was added in front of the PMT block. Nevertheless, residual
bleed-through of the 473-nm light prevented us from using GaAsP detectors. Therefore, in these
experiments, FITC (or OGB1) and SR101 were imaged using a pair of multialkali PMTs.
We used a 4x objective (Olympus XLFluor4x/340, NA=0.28) to obtain low-resolution images of
the exposure. Olympus 20x (XLUMPlanFLNXW, NA=1.0) and Zeiss 40x (IR-ACHROPLAN, NA = 0.8)
water-immersion objectives were used for high-resolution imaging. In experiments involving manipulation of a micropipette or optical fiber under the coverslip, we used a combination of Zeiss 5x (PlanNEOFLUAR, NA=0.16) and Olympus 20x (UMPlanFI, NA=0.5) objectives for a coarse approach and
fine manipulation under the glass coverslip, respectively. The laser beam diameter was adjusted to
overfill the back aperture. Diameter measurements were performed in a frame-scan mode at 10–
20 Hz, or in a ’free-hand’ line-scan mode with a scan rate of 25–50 Hz. The scan resolution was
0.5 mm or less. Calcium imaging was performed in line-scan mode at 100 Hz, 20–50 pixels per neuron, and ~10 ms dwell time.
Identification of INs and PCs in vivo and combination of 2-photon
calcium imaging and OG stimulation
First, we acquired two-photon Z-stacks of structural reference images. Since ChR2 in the VGATChR2(H134R)-EYFP line is fused with enhanced yellow fluorescent protein (EYFP) (Zhao et al., 2011),
we used EYFP fluorescence to identify INs. SR101 was used to label astrocytes (Nimmerjahn et al.,
2004) (Figure 3—figure supplement 1A). Next, we loaded cells with OGB1 within the same volume
Uhlirova et al. eLife 2016;5:e14315. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.14315 16 of 23
Research article Neuroscience
and performed in vivo calcium imaging in cortical layer II/III. OGB1 has a strong spectral overlap
with EYFP, and, in addition, ChR2-EYFP expression in the VGAT-ChR2(H134R)-EYFP line is relatively
weak. As a result, EYFP was not detectable after addition of OGB1. Therefore, we used SR101 to
coregister OGB1 images with the reference (EYFP/SR101) images. EYFP-positive cells were labeled
as INs, and cells negative for EYFP and SR101 were labeled as PCs (Figure 3—figure supplement
1B). Data could not be acquired during OG stimulation because, despite the optical filtration, some
of 473 nm excitation light reached the photodetectors causing their saturation. Therefore, we used
brief (5 ms) light pulses and acquired line scans at 100 Hz (10 ms per line) limiting the light artifact
to 20–30 ms. In this regime, we were in a good position to detect calcium transients that have a fast
rise and slow decay (time constant ~1 s [Lu¨tcke et al., 2013]).
Pharmacology
All drugs were applied topically under the objective and let to diffuse into the cortical tissue for at
least 40 min. D-(-)-2-amino-5-phosphonopentanoic acid (AP5, 500 mM in ACSF, A5282, Sigma) and
6-Cyano-7-nitroquinoxaline-2,3-dione (CNQX, 200 mM in ACSF, C239, Sigma) were used to block
AMPA and NMDA receptors for glutamate, respectively. Tetrodotoxin (TTX, 50 mM in ACSF,
554412, Calbiochem), was applied to block Na+
channels required for generation and propagation
of APs. N2-(Diphenylacetyl)-N-[(4-hydroxyphenyl)methyl]-D-arginine amide (BIBP 3226, 100 mM in
ACSF, B174, Sigma) was applied to block Y1 receptors for NPY.
Immunofluorescence staining
Brains extracted from adult VGAT-ChR2(H134R)-EYFP or wild type mice were placed in phosphatebuffered saline (PBS) with 4% paraformaldehyde for 12 hr at 4˚C and then in PBS with 30% sucrose
at 4˚C for 24 hr. 40 mm coronal sections were cut with a vibratome (The Vibratome Company). Sections were placed in PBS with 0.5% bovine serum albumin (BSA). After permeabilization with 1% Triton X-100 and 0.5% BSA in PBS for 1 hr and blocking with 10% normal goat serum, 0.5% BSA, and
0.1% Triton X-100 in PBS for 3 hr, sections were incubated overnight at 4˚C with primary antibodies
(anti-GAD67, mouse monoclonal clone 1G10.2, Millipore MAB5406; anti-EGFP, rabbit polyclonal
antiserum, Abcam ab290; both diluted 1:1000 in blocking solution). After washing, sections were
incubated with goat anti-mouse and goat anti-rabbit antibodies coupled to Alexa 594 and Alexa 488
(Invitrogen A 11,005 and A 11034), respectively, which were diluted 1:500 in blocking solution. Sections were mounted on glass slides with ProLong Gold Antifade Mountant with DAPI
(Invitrogen, Carlsbad, California). To confirm specificity of the EGFP antiserum, we stained sections
from a wild type mouse. To control for unspecific binding of the secondary antibodies, we incubated
sections only with the secondary antibodies. Stained sections were imaged on the 2-photon microscope described under ’Two-Photon Imaging’ using 750 nm excitation, an Olympus 20x (XLUMPlanFLNXW, NA=1.0) objective and 460/60 nm, 525/50 nm, 670/50 nm filters to detect DAPI, Alexa
488, and Alexa 594 emissions. Two-photon image stacks (Z-step size 3 mm, 1024x1024 pixel,
400x400 mm field-of-view) were used to count GAD67+
, EYFP+
, or GAD67+
/EYFP+
cells.
Extracellular electrophysiological recordings
Extracellular recordings of LFP and MUA were acquired as described in (Devor et al., 2003,
2005; Einevoll et al., 2007), using a tungsten microelectrode (FHC, 6–8 MW). The recorded potential was amplified and filtered into two signals: a low-frequency part (0.1–500 Hz, sampled at 2 kHz
with 16 bits) and a high-frequency part (150–5000 Hz, sampled at 20 kHz with 12 bits). The low-frequency part is referred to as the LFP. The high-frequency part was further filtered digitally between
750 and 5000 Hz using a zero phase-shift second-order Butterworth filter and rectified along the
time axis to provide the MUA.
Microelectrodes were guided under the glass coverslip and positioned in cortical layer II/III using
Luigs & Neumann translation stage (380FM-U) and manipulation equipment integrated into the
Ultima system. In calcium imaging experiments, the electrode was moved into the field of view right
after acquisition of the imaging data. Simultaneous two-photon imaging and electrophysiological
recordings from exactly the same location was not possible because of the photovoltaic artifact
resulting from direct exposure of the metal microelectrode to focused Ti:Sapphire laser light.
Uhlirova et al. eLife 2016;5:e14315. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.14315 17 of 23
Research article Neuroscience
Computing membrane potential in reconstructed neurons
Reconstructed neuronal morphologies were obtained from NeuroMorpho.Org (Ascoli et al., 2007).
We used two VIP-positive cells (ID= NMO_06142, NMO_06144) from layer II/III of the rat Barrel cortex provided by Bruno Cauli (Karagiannis et al., 2009). First, the original morphologies were scaled
in Z (depth axis) by 0.6 to account for differences in the cortical thickness between the rat and
mouse SI. Next, we stretched the middle dendritic section from 100 mm below the surface (the border between layers I and II) to the soma along the depth axis to position the soma in layer V
(600 mm deep) approximating morphology of a VIP-positive neuron from layer V (Figure 4—figure
supplement 2). All computations were carried out in the Neuron simulation environment (Hines and
Carnevale, 1997) assuming passive membrane properties.
Imaging data analysis
Data were analyzed in MATLAB using custom-written software as described in (Tian et al., 2010;
Nizar et al., 2013). Unless indicated, statistics were performed across subjects. In scatter plots,
measurements were group-averaged according to the depth in 100-mm bins for each subject before
calculating the mean and SE across subjects for each bin. p-value for the regression parameters of
the scatter data, in particular, slope values for the linear regression fits, were computed using MATLAB’s statistical toolbox function regstats(). The reported p-value is for the t statistic using the null
hypothesis that the slope is equal to zero.
When multiple categories were defined (e.g., time-courses with and without constriction in
Figure 1B), we averaged measurements for each category within a subject prior to performing statistics across subjects. When peak normalization was applied, we first averaged all time courses
acquired within a subject. Then, averaged time courses were normalized by the peak amplitude
before calculating the average across subjects.
For analysis of calcium imaging data, acquired in line-scan mode, line segments corresponding to
individual neuronal cell bodies were segmented based on their intensity profile (cell bodies were
brighter than neuropil). For each sampled neuron, the calcium signal per time point (i.e., one line of
the line-scan) was calculated as an average of all pixels within the corresponding line segment. This
calculation was repeated for each line in the time series to generate a single-neuron time-course.
The same procedure was performed separately for each neuron, resulting in a family of neuron-specific time-courses for each line-scan. After digital removal of the OG light artifact, data were downsampled by a factor of two along the time axis to provide a 20-ms time resolution.
Acknowledgements
We gratefully acknowledge support from the NIH (NS057198, EB00790, U01NS094232, NS082097,
EB003832 and S10RR029050), the Research Council of Norway, and the Ministry of Education, Youth
and Sports of the Czech Republic (project CEITEC 2020 (LQ1601)). K Kılıc¸ was supported by a postdoctoral fellowship from the International Headache Society in 2014 and TUBITAK in 2015. F
Razoux, M Thunemann and M Desjardins were supported by postdoctoral fellowships from the Swiss
National Science Foundation, German Research Foundation (DFG TH 2031/1) and Natural Sciences
and Engineering Research Council of Canada, respectively.
Additional information
Competing interests
DK: Reviewing editor, eLife. The other authors declare that no competing interests exist.
Funding
Funder Grant reference number Author
European Regional
Development Fund
CEITEC CZ.1.05/1.1.00/
02.0068
Hana Uhlirova
International Headache Society Kıvılcım Kılıc¸
Uhlirova et al. eLife 2016;5:e14315. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.14315 18 of 23
Research article Neuroscience
Tu¨rkiye Bilimsel ve Teknolojik
Aras¸ tirma Kurumu
Kıvılcım Kılıc¸
John Carroll University,
Department of Physics
Peifang Tian
Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft
DFG TH 2031/1 Martin Thunemann
Natural Sciences and
Engineering Research Council
of Canada
Miche` le Desjardins
Schweizerischer Nationalfonds
zur Fo¨ rderung der
Wissenschaftlichen Forschung
Florence Razoux
National Institutes of Health NS082097 David Kleinfeld
National Institutes of Health EB003832 David Kleinfeld
Norges Forskningsra˚ d Gaute T Einevoll
National Institutes of Health EB00790 Anders M Dale
National Institutes of Health S10RR029050 Anders M Dale
National Institutes of Health NS057198 Anna Devor
National Institutes of Health U01NS094232 Anna Devor
The funders had no role in study design, data collection and interpretation, or the decision to
submit the work for publication.
Author contributions
HU, KK, PT, MT, MD, Final approval of the version to be published, Acquisition of data, Analysis and
interpretation of data, Drafting or revising the article; PAS, SS, TVN, KN, VBS, TCS, GTE, Final
approval of the version to be published, Analysis and interpretation of data, Drafting or revising the
article; CM, QC, KLW, FR, MV, JAC, CGLF, Final approval of the version to be published, Acquisition
of data, Drafting or revising the article; MA, Final approval of the version to be published, Drafting
or revising the article, Contributed unpublished essential data or reagents; YF, EM, SD, OAA, GAS,
DAB, DK, RBB, Final approval of the version to be published, Conception and design, Drafting or
revising the article; AMD, Final approval of the version to be published, Conception and design,
Analysis and interpretation of data, Drafting or revising the article; AD, Final approval of the version
to be published, Conception and design, Acquisition of data, Analysis and interpretation of data,
Drafting or revising the article
Author ORCIDs
Srdjan Djurovic, http://orcid.org/0000-0002-8140-8061
Gaute T Einevoll, http://orcid.org/0000-0002-5425-5012
Anna Devor, http://orcid.org/0000-0002-5143-3960
Ethics
Animal experimentation: This study was performed in strict accordance with the recommendations
in the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals of the National Institutes of Health. All of
the animals were handled according to approved institutional animal care and use committee
(IACUC) protocols (#S07360, S14275) of the University of California San Diego.
References
Abounader R, Elhusseiny A, Cohen Z, Olivier A, Stanimirovic D, Quirion R, Hamel E. 1999. Expression of
neuropeptide Y receptors mRNA and protein in human brain vessels and cerebromicrovascular cells in culture.
Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow and Metabolism 19:155–163. doi: 10.1097/00004647-199902000-00007
Anenberg E, Chan AW, Xie Y, LeDue JM, Murphy TH. 2015. Optogenetic stimulation of GABA neurons can
decrease local neuronal activity while increasing cortical blood flow. Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow &
Metabolism 35:1597–86. doi: 10.1038/jcbfm.2015.140
Uhlirova et al. eLife 2016;5:e14315. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.14315 19 of 23
Research article Neuroscience
Aravanis AM, Wang LP, Zhang F, Meltzer LA, Mogri MZ, Schneider MB, Deisseroth K. 2007. An optical neural
interface: in vivo control of rodent motor cortex with integrated fiberoptic and optogenetic technology. Journal
of Neural Engineering 4:S143–156. doi: 10.1088/1741-2560/4/3/S02
Arenkiel BR, Peca J, Davison IG, Feliciano C, Deisseroth K, Augustine GJ, Ehlers MD, Feng G. 2007. In vivo lightinduced activation of neural circuitry in transgenic mice expressing channelrhodopsin-2. Neuron 54:205–218.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2007.03.005
Ascoli GA, Donohue DE, Halavi M. 2007. NeuroMorpho.Org: a central resource for neuronal morphologies. The
Journal of Neuroscience 27:9247–9251. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2055-07.2007
Attwell D, Iadecola C. 2002. The neural basis of functional brain imaging signals. Trends in Neurosciences 25:
621–625. doi: 10.1016/S0166-2236(02)02264-6
Attwell D, Laughlin SB. 2001. An energy budget for signaling in the grey matter of the brain. Journal of Cerebral
Blood Flow and Metabolism 21:1133–1145. doi: 10.1097/00004647-200110000-00001
Bao L, Kopp J, Zhang X, Xu ZQ, Zhang LF, Wong H, Walsh J, Ho¨ kfelt T. 1997. Localization of neuropeptide Y Y1
receptors in cerebral blood vessels. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America 94:12661–12666. doi: 10.1073/pnas.94.23.12661
Bean BP. 2007. The action potential in mammalian central neurons. Nature Reviews. Neuroscience 8:451–465.
doi: 10.1038/nrn2148
Beltramo R, D’Urso G, Dal Maschio M, Farisello P, Bovetti S, Clovis Y, Lassi G, Tucci V, De Pietri Tonelli D, Fellin
T. 2013. Layer-specific excitatory circuits differentially control recurrent network dynamics in the neocortex.
Nature Neuroscience 16:227–234. doi: 10.1038/nn.3306
Bonder DE, McCarthy KD. 2014. Astrocytic Gq-GPCR-linked IP3R-dependent Ca2+ signaling does not mediate
neurovascular coupling in mouse visual cortex in vivo. Journal of Neuroscience 34:13139–13150. doi: 10.1523/
JNEUROSCI.2591-14.2014
Buxton RB, Griffeth VE, Simon AB, Moradi F, Shmuel A. 2014. Variability of the coupling of blood flow and
oxygen metabolism responses in the brain: a problem for interpreting BOLD studies but potentially a new
window on the underlying neural activity. Frontiers in Neuroscience 8:139. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2014.00139
Buzsa´ ki G, Anastassiou CA, Koch C. 2012. The origin of extracellular fields and currents–EEG, ECoG, LFP and
spikes. Nature Reviews. Neuroscience 13:407–420. doi: 10.1038/nrn3241
Buzsa´ ki G. 2004. Large-scale recording of neuronal ensembles. Nature Neuroscience 7:446–451. doi: 10.1038/
nn1233
Cahoy JD, Emery B, Kaushal A, Foo LC, Zamanian JL, Christopherson KS, Xing Y, Lubischer JL, Krieg PA,
Krupenko SA, Thompson WJ, Barres BA. 2008. A transcriptome database for astrocytes, neurons, and
oligodendrocytes: a new resource for understanding brain development and function. Journal of Neuroscience
28:264–278. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4178-07.2008
Cauli B, Hamel E. 2010. Revisiting the role of neurons in neurovascular coupling. Frontiers in Neuroenergetics 2:
9. doi: 10.3389/fnene.2010.00009
Cauli B, Tong XK, Rancillac A, Serluca N, Lambolez B, Rossier J, Hamel E. 2004. Cortical GABA interneurons in
neurovascular coupling: relays for subcortical vasoactive pathways. Journal of Neuroscience 24:8940–8949. doi:
10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3065-04.2004
Cauli B, Zhou X, Tricoire L, Toussay X, Staiger JF. 2014. Revisiting enigmatic cortical calretinin-expressing
interneurons. Frontiers in Neuroanatomy 8:52. doi: 10.3389/fnana.2014.00052
Chen BR, Bouchard MB, McCaslin AF, Burgess SA, Hillman EM. 2011. High-speed vascular dynamics of the
hemodynamic response. NeuroImage 54:1021–1030. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2010.09.036
Chen BR, Kozberg MG, Bouchard MB, Shaik MA, Hillman EM. 2014. A critical role for the vascular endothelium in
functional neurovascular coupling in the brain. Journal of the American Heart Association 3:e000787. doi: 10.
1161/JAHA.114.000787
Cho KH, Jang JH, Jang HJ, Kim MJ, Yoon SH, Fukuda T, Tennigkeit F, Singer W, Rhie DJ. 2010. Subtype-specific
dendritic Ca(2+) dynamics of inhibitory interneurons in the rat visual cortex. Journal of Neurophysiology 104:
840–853. doi: 10.1152/jn.00146.2010
Christie IN, Wells JA, Southern P, Marina N, Kasparov S, Gourine AV, Lythgoe MF. 2012. fMRI response to blue
light delivery in the naive brain: Implications for combined optogenetic fMRI studies. Neuroimage 66C:634–
641. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012.10.074
Dacey RG, Bassett JE, Takayasu M. 1988. Vasomotor responses of rat intracerebral arterioles to vasoactive
intestinal peptide, substance P, neuropeptide Y, and bradykinin. Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow and
Metabolism 8:254–261. doi: 10.1038/jcbfm.1988.56
Davis TL, Kwong KK, Weisskoff RM, Rosen BR. 1998. Calibrated functional MRI: mapping the dynamics of
oxidative metabolism. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 95:
1834–1839. doi: 10.1073/pnas.95.4.1834
de la Pen˜ a E, Geijo-Barrientos E. 1996. Laminar localization, morphology, and physiological properties of
pyramidal neurons that have the low-threshold calcium current in the guinea-pig medial frontal cortex. Journal
of Neuroscience 16:5301–5311.
Devor A, Dunn AK, Andermann ML, Ulbert I, Boas DA, Dale AM. 2003. Coupling of total hemoglobin
concentration, oxygenation, and neural activity in rat somatosensory cortex. Neuron 39:353–359. doi: 10.1016/
S0896-6273(03)00403-3
Devor A, Hillman EM, Tian P, Waeber C, Teng IC, Ruvinskaya L, Shalinsky MH, Zhu H, Haslinger RH, Narayanan
SN, Ulbert I, Dunn AK, Lo EH, Rosen BR, Dale AM, Kleinfeld D, Boas DA. 2008. Stimulus-induced changes in
Uhlirova et al. eLife 2016;5:e14315. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.14315 20 of 23
Research article Neuroscience
blood flow and 2-deoxyglucose uptake dissociate in ipsilateral somatosensory cortex. Journal of Neuroscience
28:14347–14357. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4307-08.2008
Devor A, Tian P, Nishimura N, Teng IC, Hillman EM, Narayanan SN, Ulbert I, Boas DA, Kleinfeld D, Dale AM.
2007. Suppressed neuronal activity and concurrent arteriolar vasoconstriction may explain negative blood
oxygenation level-dependent signal. Journal of Neuroscience 27:4452–4459. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0134-
07.2007
Devor A, Ulbert I, Dunn AK, Narayanan SN, Jones SR, Andermann ML, Boas DA, Dale AM. 2005. Coupling of the
cortical hemodynamic response to cortical and thalamic neuronal activity. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 102:3822–3827. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0407789102
Doronin A, Meglinski I. 2011. Online object oriented Monte Carlo computational tool for the needs of
biomedical optics. Biomedical Optics Express 2:2461–2469. doi: 10.1364/BOE.2.002461
Doronin A, Meglinski I. 2012. Peer-to-peer Monte Carlo simulation of photon migration in topical applications of
biomedical optics. Journal of Biomedical Optics 17:90504–90501. doi: 10.1117/1.JBO.17.9.090504
Drew PJ, Shih AY, Driscoll JD, Knutsen PM, Blinder P, Davalos D, Akassoglou K, Tsai PS, Kleinfeld D. 2010.
Chronic optical access through a polished and reinforced thinned skull. Nature Methods 7:981–984. doi: 10.
1038/nmeth.1530
Einevoll GT, Franke F, Hagen E, Pouzat C, Harris KD. 2012. Towards reliable spike-train recordings from
thousands of neurons with multielectrodes. Current Opinion in Neurobiology 22:11–17. doi: 10.1016/j.conb.
2011.10.001
Einevoll GT, Kayser C, Logothetis NK, Panzeri S. 2013. Modelling and analysis of local field potentials for
studying the function of cortical circuits. Nature Reviews. Neuroscience 14:770–785. doi: 10.1038/nrn3599
Einevoll GT, Pettersen KH, Devor A, Ulbert I, Halgren E, Dale AM. 2007. Laminar population analysis: estimating
firing rates and evoked synaptic activity from multielectrode recordings in rat barrel cortex. Journal of
Neurophysiology 97:2174–2190. doi: 10.1152/jn.00845.2006
Flock ST, Jacques SL, Wilson BC, Star WM, van Gemert MJ. 1992. Optical properties of Intralipid: a phantom
medium for light propagation studies. Lasers in Surgery and Medicine 12:510–519. doi: 10.1002/lsm.
1900120510
Foutz TJ, Arlow RL, McIntyre CC. 2012. Theoretical principles underlying optical stimulation of a
channelrhodopsin-2 positive pyramidal neuron. Journal of Neurophysiology 107:3235–3245. doi: 10.1152/jn.
00501.2011
Goldberg JH, Tamas G, Yuste R. 2003. Ca2+ imaging of mouse neocortical interneurone dendrites: Ia-type K+
channels control action potential backpropagation. The Journal of Physiology 551:49–65. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.
2003.042580
Gordon GR, Choi HB, Rungta RL, Ellis-Davies GC, MacVicar BA. 2008. Brain metabolism dictates the polarity of
astrocyte control over arterioles. Nature 456:745–749. doi: 10.1038/nature07525
Grewe BF, Langer D, Kasper H, Kampa BM, Helmchen F. 2010. High-speed in vivo calcium imaging reveals
neuronal network activity with near-millisecond precision. Nature Methods 7:399–405. doi: 10.1038/nmeth.
1453
Helmstaedter M, Sakmann B, Feldmeyer D. 2009. Neuronal correlates of local, lateral, and translaminar
inhibition with reference to cortical columns. Cerebral Cortex 19:926–937. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhn141
Hines ML, Carnevale NT. 1997. The NEURON simulation environment. Neural Computation 9:1179–1209. doi:
10.1162/neco.1997.9.6.1179
Hoge RD. 2012. Calibrated FMRI. NeuroImage 62:930–937. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012.02.022
Iadecola C, Yang G, Ebner TJ, Chen G. 1997. Local and propagated vascular responses evoked by focal synaptic
activity in cerebellar cortex. Journal of Neurophysiology 78:651–659.
Jego P, Pacheco-Torres J, Araque A, Canals S. 2014. Functional MRI in mice lacking IP3-dependent calcium
signaling in astrocytes. Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow and Metabolism 34:1599–1603. doi: 10.1038/jcbfm.
2014.144
Jensen LJ, Holstein-Rathlou NH. 2013. The vascular conducted response in cerebral blood flow regulation.
Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow and Metabolism 33:649–656. doi: 10.1038/jcbfm.2013.25
Kaiser KM, Zilberter Y, Sakmann B. 2001. Back-propagating action potentials mediate calcium signalling in
dendrites of bitufted interneurons in layer 2/3 of rat somatosensory cortex. The Journal of Physiology 535:17–
31. doi: 10.1111/j.1469-7793.2001.t01-1-00017.x
Karagiannis A, Gallopin T, Da´ vid C, Battaglia D, Geoffroy H, Rossier J, Hillman EM, Staiger JF, Cauli B. 2009.
Classification of NPY-expressing neocortical interneurons. Journal of Neuroscience 29:3642–3659. doi: 10.
1523/JNEUROSCI.0058-09.2009
Kawaguchi Y, Kubota Y. 1996. Physiological and morphological identification of somatostatin- or vasoactive
intestinal polypeptide-containing cells among GABAergic cell subtypes in rat frontal cortex. Journal of
Neuroscience 16:2701–2715.
Kerlin AM, Andermann ML, Berezovskii VK, Reid RC. 2010. Broadly tuned response properties of diverse
inhibitory neuron subtypes in mouse visual cortex. Neuron 67:858–871. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2010.08.002
Kleinfeld D, Blinder P, Drew PJ, Driscoll JD, Muller A, Tsai PS, Shih AY. 2011. A guide to delineate the logic of
neurovascular signaling in the brain. Frontiers in Neuroenergetics 3:1. doi: 10.3389/fnene.2011.00001
Kobat D, Durst ME, Nishimura N, Wong AW, Schaffer CB, Xu C. 2009. Deep tissue multiphoton microscopy
using longer wavelength excitation. Optics Express 17:13354–13364. doi: 10.1364/OE.17.013354
Lacroix A, Toussay X, Anenberg E, Lecrux C, Ferreiro´ s N, Karagiannis A, Plaisier F, Chausson P, Jarlier F, Burgess
SA, Hillman EM, Tegeder I, Murphy TH, Hamel E, Cauli B. 2015. COX-2-derived prostaglandin E2 produced by
Uhlirova et al. eLife 2016;5:e14315. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.14315 21 of 23
Research article Neuroscience
pyramidal neurons contributes to neurovascular coupling in the rodent cerebral cortex. Journal of Neuroscience
35:11791–11810. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0651-15.2015
Langer D, Helmchen F. 2012. Post hoc immunostaining of GABAergic neuronal subtypes following in vivo twophoton calcium imaging in mouse neocortex. Pflu€Gers Archiv 463:339–354. doi: 10.1007/s00424-011-1048-9
Lecrux C, Toussay X, Kocharyan A, Fernandes P, Neupane S, Le´ vesque M, Plaisier F, Shmuel A, Cauli B, Hamel E.
2011. Pyramidal neurons are "neurogenic hubs" in the neurovascular coupling response to whisker stimulation.
Journal of Neuroscience 31:9836–9847. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4943-10.2011
Lindvere L, Janik R, Dorr A, Chartash D, Sahota B, Sled JG, Stefanovic B. 2013. Cerebral microvascular network
geometry changes in response to functional stimulation. NeuroImage 71:248–259. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.
2013.01.011
Liu X, Li C, Falck JR, Harder DR, Koehler RC. 2012. Relative contribution of cyclooxygenases, epoxyeicosatrienoic
acids, and pH to the cerebral blood flow response to vibrissal stimulation. American Journal of Physiology.
Heart and Circulatory Physiology 302:H1075–1085. doi: 10.1152/ajpheart.00794.2011
Lu¨ tcke H, Gerhard F, Zenke F, Gerstner W, Helmchen F. 2013. Inference of neuronal network spike dynamics and
topology from calcium imaging data. Frontiers in Neural Circuits 7:201. doi: 10.3389/fncir.2013.00201
Markram H, Toledo-Rodriguez M, Wang Y, Gupta A, Silberberg G, Wu C. 2004. Interneurons of the neocortical
inhibitory system. Nature Reviews Neuroscience 5:793–807. doi: 10.1038/nrn1519
Merighi A, Salio C, Ferrini F, Lossi L. 2011. Neuromodulatory function of neuropeptides in the normal CNS.
Journal of Chemical Neuroanatomy 42:276–287. doi: 10.1016/j.jchemneu.2011.02.001
Nagel G, Szellas T, Huhn W, Kateriya S, Adeishvili N, Berthold P, Ollig D, Hegemann P, Bamberg E. 2003.
Channelrhodopsin-2, a directly light-gated cation-selective membrane channel. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 100:13940–13945. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1936192100
Neske GT, Patrick SL, Connors BW. 2015. Contributions of diverse excitatory and inhibitory neurons to recurrent
network activity in cerebral cortex. Journal of Neuroscience 35:1089–1105. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2279-14.
2015
Nimmerjahn A, Kirchhoff F, Kerr JN, Helmchen F. 2004. Sulforhodamine 101 as a specific marker of astroglia in
the neocortex in vivo. Nature Methods 1:31–37. doi: 10.1038/nmeth706
Nizar K, Uhlirova H, Tian P, Saisan PA, Cheng Q, Reznichenko L, Weldy KL, Steed TC, Sridhar VB, MacDonald
CL, Cui J, Gratiy SL, Sakadzic´ S, Boas DA, Beka TI, Einevoll GT, Chen J, Masliah E, Dale AM, Silva GA, et al.
2013. In vivo stimulus-induced vasodilation occurs without IP3 receptor activation and may precede astrocytic
calcium increase. Journal of Neuroscience 33:8411–8422. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3285-12.2013
Peppiatt CM, Howarth C, Mobbs P, Attwell D. 2006. Bidirectional control of CNS capillary diameter by pericytes.
Nature 443:700–704. doi: 10.1038/nature05193
Perrenoud Q, Geoffroy H, Gauthier B, Rancillac A, Alfonsi F, Kessaris N, Rossier J, Vitalis T, Gallopin T. 2012.
Characterization of Type I and Type II nNOS-expressing interneurons in the barrel cortex of mouse. Frontiers in
Neural Circuits 6:36. doi: 10.3389/fncir.2012.00036
Perrenoud Q, Rossier J, Fe´ re´ zou I, Geoffroy H, Gallopin T, Vitalis T, Rancillac A. 2012. Activation of cortical 5-HT
(3) receptor-expressing interneurons induces NO mediated vasodilatations and NPY mediated
vasoconstrictions. Frontiers in Neural Circuits 6:50. doi: 10.3389/fncir.2012.00050
Pettersen KH, Einevoll GT. 2008. Amplitude variability and extracellular low-pass filtering of neuronal spikes.
Biophysical Journal 94:784–802. doi: 10.1529/biophysj.107.111179
Pike GB. 2012. Quantitative functional MRI: concepts, issues and future challenges. NeuroImage 62:1234–1240.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.10.046
Pisanello F, Sileo L, Oldenburg IA, Pisanello M, Martiradonna L, Assad JA, Sabatini BL, De Vittorio M. 2014.
Multipoint-emitting optical fibers for spatially addressable in vivo optogenetics. Neuron 82:1245–1254. doi: 10.
1016/j.neuron.2014.04.041
Pnevmatikakis EA, Soudry D, Gao Y, Machado TA, Merel J, Pfau D, Reardon T, Mu Y, Lacefield C, Yang W,
Ahrens M, Bruno R, Jessell TM, Peterka DS, Yuste R, Paninski L. 2016. Simultaneous Denoising, Deconvolution,
and Demixing of Calcium Imaging Data. Neuron 89:285–299. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2015.11.037
Raichle ME, Mintun MA. 2006. Brain work and brain imaging. Annual Review of Neuroscience 29:449–476. doi:
10.1146/annurev.neuro.29.051605.112819
Rosenblum WI, Weinbrecht P, Nelson GH. 1990. Propagated constriction in mouse pial arterioles: possible role
of endothelium in transmitting the propagated response. Microcirculation, Endothelium, and Lymphatics 6:
369–387.
Schoenenberger P, Grunditz A, Rose T, Oertner TG. 2008. Optimizing the spatial resolution of
Channelrhodopsin-2 activation. Brain Cell Biology 36:119–127. doi: 10.1007/s11068-008-9025-8
Segal SS, Duling BR. 1986. Flow control among microvessels coordinated by intercellular conduction. Science
234:868–870. doi: 10.1126/science.3775368
Shin HK, Jones PB, Garcia-Alloza M, Borrelli L, Greenberg SM, Bacskai BJ, Frosch MP, Hyman BT, Moskowitz
MA, Ayata C. 2007. Age-dependent cerebrovascular dysfunction in a transgenic mouse model of cerebral
amyloid angiopathy. Brain 130:2310–2319. doi: 10.1093/brain/awm156
Siero JC, Petridou N, Hoogduin H, Luijten PR, Ramsey NF. 2011. Cortical depth-dependent temporal dynamics
of the BOLD response in the human brain. Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow and Metabolism 31:1999–2008. doi:
10.1038/jcbfm.2011.57
Sokoloff L, Reivich M, Kennedy C, Des Rosiers MH, Patlak CS, Pettigrew KD, Sakurada O, Shinohara M. 1977. The
[14C]deoxyglucose method for the measurement of local cerebral glucose utilization: theory, procedure, and
Uhlirova et al. eLife 2016;5:e14315. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.14315 22 of 23
Research article Neuroscience
normal values in the conscious and anesthetized albino rat. Journal of Neurochemistry 28:897–916. doi: 10.1111/
j.1471-4159.1977.tb10649.x
Stosiek C, Garaschuk O, Holthoff K, Konnerth A. 2003. In vivo two-photon calcium imaging of neuronal networks.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 100:7319–7324. doi: 10.
1073/pnas.1232232100
Stuart GJ, Sakmann B. 1994. Active propagation of somatic action potentials into neocortical pyramidal cell
dendrites. Nature 367:69–72. doi: 10.1038/367069a0
Takata N, Nagai T, Ozawa K, Oe Y, Mikoshiba K, Hirase H. 2013. Cerebral blood flow modulation by Basal
forebrain or whisker stimulation can occur independently of large cytosolic Ca2+ signaling in astrocytes. PloS
One 8:e66525. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0066525
Tasic B, Menon V, Nguyen TN, Kim TK, Jarsky T, Yao Z, Levi B, Gray LT, Sorensen SA, Dolbeare T, Bertagnolli D,
Goldy J, Shapovalova N, Parry S, Lee C, Smith K, Bernard A, Madisen L, Sunkin SM, Hawrylycz M, et al. 2016.
Adult mouse cortical cell taxonomy revealed by single cell transcriptomics. Nature Neuroscience 19:335–346.
doi: 10.1038/nn.4216
Tian P, Teng IC, May LD, Kurz R, Lu K, Scadeng M, Hillman EM, De Crespigny AJ, D’Arceuil HE, Mandeville JB,
Marota JJ, Rosen BR, Liu TT, Boas DA, Buxton RB, Dale AM, Devor A. 2010. Cortical depth-specific
microvascular dilation underlies laminar differences in blood oxygenation level-dependent functional MRI
signal. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 107:15246–15251.
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1006735107
Welsh DG, Segal SS. 1998. Endothelial and smooth muscle cell conduction in arterioles controlling blood flow.
The American Journal of Physiology 274:H178–186.
Yaksi E, Friedrich RW. 2006. Reconstruction of firing rate changes across neuronal populations by temporally
deconvolved Ca2+ imaging. Nature Methods 3:377–383. doi: 10.1038/nmeth874
Yona G, Meitav N, Kahn I, Shoham S. 2016. Realistic numerical and analytical modeling of light scattering in brain
tissue for optogenetic applications(1,2,3). eNeuro 3. doi: 10.1523/ENEURO.0059-15.2015
Yu X, Qian C, Chen DY, Dodd SJ, Koretsky AP. 2014. Deciphering laminar-specific neural inputs with linescanning fMRI. Nature Methods 11:55–58. doi: 10.1038/nmeth.2730
Zhao S, Ting JT, Atallah HE, Qiu L, Tan J, Gloss B, Augustine GJ, Deisseroth K, Luo M, Graybiel AM, Feng G.
2011. Cell type–specific channelrhodopsin-2 transgenic mice for optogenetic dissection of neural circuitry
function. Nature Methods 8:745–752. doi: 10.1038/nmeth.1668
Uhlirova et al. eLife 2016;5:e14315. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.14315 23 of 23
Research article Neuroscience



Journal of Physiology (1996), 495.3, pp.769-784
Membrane potentials and microenvironment of rat dorsal
vagal cells in vitro during energy depletion
Klaus Ballanyi, Jens Doutheil and Johannes Brockhaus
II. Physiologisches Institut, Universitat G6ttinyen, Humboldtallee 23,
D-37073 Gottingen, Germany
1. Brainstem slices were taken from mature rats. In the dorsal vagal nucleus (DVNX), membrane
potentials (Em) of neurons (DVNs) and glia, as well as extracellular oxygen, K+ and pH (Po2,
aKO, pHO), were analysed during metabolic disturbances.
2. Postsynaptic potentials of DVNs, elicited by repetitive electrical stimulation of the solitary
tract (TS), led to a secondary glial depolarization of up to 25 mV, a fall in Po. of up to
150 mmHg, a rise in extracellular aKo of up to 9 mm, and a fall in pHo of about 0-2 pH units.
3. Hypoxic superfusates produced tissue anoxia, leading to an aK. increase of less than 2 mM
and a pHo fall of 024 + 0 04 pH units (mean + S.D.). Glucose-free solution evoked, after a
delay of more than 8 min, a slow rise in aKo of 1-9 + 0-8 mm, accompanied by a mean
increase in pHo of 0-24 + 0-13 pH units. After pre-incubation in glucose-free solution, anoxia
elevated aKo by up to 15 mm, whereas the anoxia-induced pHo decrease was completely
blocked.
4. In 45 of 118 DVNs, anoxia elicited a persistent hyperpolarization of 15'6 + 5 0 mV. In the
remaining DVNs, anoxic exposure either did not produce a change in Em (37 %) or led to a
depolarization of less than 10 mV (25 %). A stable depolarization of 9 + 3 8 mV was detected
in glial cells during anoxia. Similar responses were revealed in oxygenated glucose-free
solution after a delay of 12-60 min.
5. The metabolism-related hyperpolarizations were blocked by 100-500 /uM tolbutamide or
20-100 AM glibenclamide, leading to recovery of spontaneous (0-5-6 Hz) spike discharge. In
these cells, 400-500 uM diazoxide evoked hyperpolarizations and blockade of spontaneous
activity.
6. In DVNs and glial cells, a progressive depolarization of up to 40 mV in amplitude developed
during anoxic exposure after pre-incubation in glucose-free solution.
7. The results show that oxygen or glucose depletion does not impair the viability of DVNX
cells. The contribution of neuronal ATP-sensitive K+ (KATP) channels to this tolerance is
discussed.
Most regions of the mature mammalian brain are highly
vulnerable to hypoxia or ischaemia (Hansen, 1985; Haddad
& Jiang, 1993). As analysed in detail in cortical neurons,
this is due to a progressive membrane depolarization,
resulting in the impairment of ion gradients and loss of
excitability (Silver & Ereczinska, 1990; Haddad & Jiang,
1993). The anoxia-induced depolarization is frequently
preceded by a transient hyperpolarization (Hansen,
Hounsgaard & Jahnsen, 1982), which is thought to have a
protective function by reducing activity-related ion fluxes
(Hansen, 1985; Hochachka, 1986; Richter & Ballanyi, 1996).
In particular neurons of different brain regions, these hyperpolarizations, which are due to ATP-sensitive K+ (KATP)
channels, persist for several minutes without subsequent
development of profound depolarizations (e.g. Murphy &
Greenfield, 1992; Nieber, Seveik & Illes, 1995).
Stable anoxia-induced hyperpolarizations, mediated by the
activation of KATP channels, have recently also been reported
for a subpopulation of dorsal vagal neurons (DVNs) in thin
brainstem slices of rats (Trapp & Ballanyi, 1995). In that
study, it was shown that anoxia did not substantially impair
the excitability of these DVNs after blockade of the anoxic
hyperpolarization with sulphonylurea inhibitors of KATP
channels (Ashcroft & Ashcroft, 1990; Haddad & Jiang,
1993). These authors suggested that KATP channels might
not play a protective role during anoxia, but instead might
serve as glucose sensors in these cells, as was originally
5342 769
K. Ballanyi, J Doutheil and J Brockhaus
demonstrated for hypothalamic neurons (Ashford, Boden
& Treherne, 1990). This suggestion was based on the
observation that glucose depletion led to a hyperpolarization
of DVNs, which was very similar to that observed during
oxygen depletion (Ballanyi, Doutheil & Richter, 1992a;
Doutheil, Ballanyi & Richter, 1992).
A major aim of the present study was to analyse the ionic
mechanism of the glucose-dependent hyperpolarizations. To
obtain a better understanding of possible functional
differences in the response of DVNs to anoxia or glucose
depletion, we have compared the effects of these types of
energy depletion on ion homeostasis in the dorsal vagal
nucleus (DVNX). For this purpose, 02- and ion-sensitive
microelectrodes were used to monitor the partial pressure of
interstitial oxygen (PO2), extracellular K+ (aK0) and pH
(pHo). For a more complete assessment of the effects of
energy depletion on the cellular elements of the DVNX, the
membrane potential (Em) of glial cells in the vicinity of
DVNs was studied during anoxia. Finally, the effects on Em
and ionic microenvironment of complete blockade of
metabolism by anoxic exposure after pre-incubation in
glucose-free solutions were analysed. The results confirm
previous assumptions (Trapp & Ballanyi, 1995) that KATP
channels are responsible for the glucose-dependent hyperpolarizations of DVNs. It is concluded that neurons and glial
cells of the DVNX are particularly tolerant of metabolic
disturbances. Parts of the results have been published in
abstract form (Ballanyi et al. 1992a; Ballanyi, Kuipers,
Doutheil & Richter, 1992 b; Doutheil et al. 1992).
METHODS
Preparation and solutions
The experiments were done on 2- to 6-week-old rats anaesthetized
with ether and decapitated at the cervical spinal level. Subsequent
to craniotomy, the forebrain was removed, the spinal cord was cut
and the brainstem and the adjacent cerebellum were isolated. The
brainstem was separated from the cerebellum and transferred to a
vibratome (Vibracut 1.4; FTB, Weinheim, Germany). Transverse
slices in the region of the obex had a rostrocaudal diameter of
400 + 20 /sm. Throughout the isolation and cutting procedure, icecold saline (for composition, see below) was poured over the
brainstem. Individual slices, which were stored until use at 30 °C,
were transferred to the experimental chamber, placed on a nylon
mesh and mechanically fixed with a grid as previously described
(Trapp & Ballanyi, 1995). The preparation was superfused at
30°C (flow rate, 4-6 ml min') with a saline of the following
composition (mM): 118 NaCl, 3 KCl, I-5 CaCl2, 1 MgCl2, 26 NaHCO3,
1 NaH2PO4, and 10 D-glucose (pH adjusted to 7-4 by gassing with
95% 02-5% C02). Tissue Po2 measurements were also taken in a
Hepes pH-buffered solution of the following composition (mM): 118
NaCl, 3 KCl, 1-5 CaCl2, 1 MgCI2, 25 Hepes, and 10 D-glucose,
(pH adjusted to 7-4 with NaOH; gassed with 100% 02). Drugs (all
obtained from Sigma) were added to the superfusion solutions.
Recording and stimulation
In one set of experiments, Em was measured with fine-tipped microelectrodes (o.d. < 0 5 jum), which were pulled (DPZ horizontal puller,
Zeitz, Augsburg, Germany) from borosilicate glass (GC-150 F;
Clark Electromedical Instruments, Pangbourne, Berks, UK). The
DC resistance of these electrodes was 30-60 MfQ after filling with
3 M KCI. In addition, whole-cell patch-clamp recordings were made
using patch pipettes filled with (mM): 120 potassium gluconate, 1
NaCl, 1 Na2-ATP, 0 5 CaCl2, 2 MgCl2, 1 K4-BAPTA, and 10 Hepes
(pH adjusted to 7-4 with KOH), resulting in a DC resistance of
4-8 MQ (o.d. > 2 um). Electrodes were connected to a discontinuous
sample and hold amplifier (SEVC 1; NPI, Tamm, Germany;
switching frequency, 12-20 kHz; duty cycle, 50%). Input
resistance (Rm) was measured with hyperpolarizing DC pulses of
0 05-0 5 nA amplitude and 200-700 ms duration. Current-voltage
(I- V) relations were determined by analysing steady-state Em
responses to application of depolarizing or hyperpolarizing DC
steps with a duration of 300-700 ms.
For impalement or for establishing of gigaohm seals (1-4 GQi), a
step-motor-driven micromanipulator (nano-stepper; SPI,
Heidelberg, Germany) was used. A characteristic feature of DVNs,
an A-type K+ current leading to slowing of repolarization, was
revealed in about 90% of recorded cells after injection of hyperpolarizing DC pulses (Fig. 1A; see also Trapp & Ballanyi, 1995).
DVNs were functionally identified by antidromic action potentials,
evoked by electrical stimulation (30-80 V, 50 ,us) of the mediolateral
medulla (Fig. 1B; see also Ballanyi, Branchereau, Champagnat,
Fortin & Velluti, 1993). PSPs were elicited by electrical stimulation
(5-50 V, 100jus) of the solitary tract (TS) using concentric
stimulation electrodes (SNE 100 x 10; Clark Electromedical
Instruments; Fig. 1B).
Measurements of Po,
Stainless-steel tubing was used for the gas supply to closed buffer
flasks as well as for the superfusion system, which was gravity and
gas pressure driven. Po, in the experimental chamber ranged
between 620 and 700 mmHg in oxygenated solutions, as monitored
with an 02-sensitive macroelectrode (Diamond Electro-Tech Inc.,
Ann Arbor, MI, USA). During superfusion with hypoxic saline,
gassed with N2 instead of 02, P02 in the experimental chamber fell
to 8-50 mmHg. Po2 in the DVNX was recorded with 02-sensitive
microelectrodes, obtained either from Diamond (o.d. = 20-40 ,um)
or as a gift from the Max-Planck-Institut fur Systemphysiologie
(Dortmund, Germany; o.d. = 5-15 ,um). To avoid possible
interference by C02/HC03-, the fine-tipped O2-sensitive microelectrodes were primarily used in Hepes-buffered solutions.
However, there was no difference in measurements of Po2 profiles
and the responses of Po2 to hypoxia using either type of solution
(see Results). For further details on the properties and calibration
procedures of the 02-sensitive electrodes, see Brockhaus, Ballanyi,
Smith & Richter (1993). To test the response to glucose depletion,
either glucose-free standard saline or a solution in which 10 mm
D-glucose was replaced by 10 mm sucrose was used.
Ion-sensitive microelectrodes
The methods used for construction and calibration of doublebarrelled ion-sensitive microelectrodes (o.d. = 0-8-4 ,sm) and their
properties are described in detail elsewhere (Ballanyi, Grafe, Reddy
& ten Bruggencate, 1984). The following combinations of ion
exchangers or neutral carrier resins and backfilling solutions were
used. K+-sensitive microelectrodes containing either WPI IE-190
('Corning-cocktail'; World Precision Instruments Inc., New Haven,
CT, USA) or Fluka 82500 ('valinomycin-cocktail'; Fluka, Neu-Ulm,
Germany) were backfilled with 150 mm KCI. H+-sensitive
microelectrodes containing Fluka 95291 were backfilled with
40 mm K2HPO4 + 23 mm NaOH + 15 mm NaCl (buffered to pH 7
with HCl). Reference barrels were either filled with 1 M NaCl or
with the superfusion saline. The average slope and selectivity
coefficient of the Corning-type K+-sensitive electrodes, as
770 J Physiol.495.3
Energy depletion in dorsal vagal cells
measured in solutions containing 1P5, 6 and 15 mm K+, were
52 + 34 and 0013 +0O007, respectively (n = 17), whereas the
mean slope of the valinomycin-type electrodes was 55X6 + 3-3
(n = 8). Extracellular pH (pH.) in the DVNX was determined by
comparison of the signal from the H+-sensitive microelectrodes in
the tissue with the signals in the calibration solutions at different
pH levels (6-4, 7-4 and 8 0). For measurements of changes in Po,
aKo and pHo during TS stimulation and energy depletion,
electrodes were positioned at a depth of 100-150 ,um.
Data analysis
Membrane potentials were sampled via an ITC-16 interface
(Instrutech Corp., Elmont, NY, USA) and a Mega STE-4 computer
using EPC-7 data acquisition and 'Review' analysis software
(HEKA, Lambrecht, Germany). During the experiments, signals
were also recorded on videotape (8-channel digital recorder VR-100
from Instrutech Corp. and OC870H from Loewe Opta GmbH,
Kronach, Germany) and displayed on a chart recorder (Easygraph;
Gould, Cleveland, OH, USA). Values are given as means + S.D.
A
-40-
E -60 -
LU J
-80
C
-30-
E _50 -
E
-70-
40 pA
TST 35L V, 5 Hz
r2sm
2 s
RESULTS
Activity-related changes in Ems, aK4, pH. and Po2
Prior to analysis of the effects of metabolic challenges, the
relation between activity of DVNs, the responses of glial
cells and ion homeostasis in the DVNX were investigated in
oxygenated and glucose-containing solutions. Of 118 DVNs
analysed, 109 showed tonic action potential discharges with
a frequency of 0f5-6 Hz. To study evoked postsynaptic
potentials, Em was hyperpolarized by current injection
below action potential threshold. Single-pulse TS
stimulation evoked an EPSP (Travagli, Gillis, Rossiter &
Vicini, 1991), which elicited spike discharge at higher
stimulus strengths (Fig. 1B). During repetitive TS stimulation
(5-50 V, 50 Hz, 1-10 s), summation of EPSPs led to a
prolonged period of excitation (Fig. 1 C). As illustrated in the
example shown in Fig. 1D, such stimulation produced
B a
TS
b
20 mV
5 ms
I8
80 V
m
2 s
D
-60-
ELU]77 _ -
-80 -J t I I
TS 20 V, 5 Hz 2 s
Figure 1. Activity-induced changes in membrane potential (Em) of dorsal vagal neurons (DVNs)
and glial cells
A, in this spontaneously active DVN, injection of hyperpolarizing current led to a delayed recovery to
resting Em, caused by an A-type K+ current. B, electrical stimulation of the solitary tract (TS; a) or the
mediolateral medulla (b) led to EPSPs and (antidromic in b) spike discharge. C and D, subsequent to
recovery from a single pulse, repetitive TS stimulation led to summating EPSPs in a DVN (C), causing
stepwise depolarization in a glial cell (D). Insets in C and D illustrate Em changes during tetanic stimulation
on a faster time base. All recordings are from different preparations.
J Physiol.495.3 771
r--7
I n-9 a
I
K. Ballanyi, J Doutheil and J Brockhaus
summating depolarizations of adjacent glial cells of up to
25 mV from a mean resting Em of -77-8 + 3X2 mV (n = 15).
These cells were also characterized by a lack of synaptic
potentials, and an Rm of less than 10 MQ. The stimulusevoked responses were most probably secondary to EPSPrelated release of neuronal K+ depolarizing the glia due to
their high resting K+ conductance (Ballanyi, 1995).
A
-iE
y
6
10-
8-
6-
4-
2-
Consistent with these results, increases in aKo of up to
9 mm were revealed with Corning- or valinomycin-type K+-
sensitive electrodes on repetitive TS stimulation (Fig. 2A). In
twelve of twenty-one preparations tested, a return to the
aKo baseline level of 2-3 + 041 mm after termination of TS
stimulation was preceded by a K+ undershoot of 041-0 4 mm
(Fig. 2A). These aK0 increases were accompanied by a
50 Hz, 10 s
B
7-0 -
I AlsLk 1
7-2 -
C
120 -
100 -
'a 80-
E 60-
a? 40-
20 -
0 -
0
TS, 7-5 V
min
5 min
0
15 V
0
30 V
0
50 V
D
600 -
-a 400-
? 200 -
0-~
pet
I I I I I
-200 0 200 400 600
Depth (/im)
Figure 2. Activity-induced changes in extracellular K+, pH and °2 (aK0, pH., Po2) in the dorsal
vagal nucleus (DVNX)
A, repetitive stimulation of the solitary tract (TS) at different stimulus strengths led to rises in aK0, which
were followed by an aKo undershoot. Under these conditions, a biphasic (initial alkaline, late acid going)
pH0 change (B) and a decrease in Po2 (C) were observed in different preparations. D, for determination of
Po, profiles, 02-sensitive microelectrodes were advanced in 50 um steps perpendicular to the tissue surface
and electrode signals were allowed to stabilize over 20-30 s. Numbers on the abscissa indicate the recording
depth with respect to the upper surface of the 400 um-thick brainstem slices (0 gim). Negative values
correspond to measurements above the preparation.
772 J Physiol.495.3
biphasic change in pH. from its steady-state level of
7f2 + 0 05 (n = 18). An initial alkalinization of up to
0 3 pH units with a duration of less than 30 s turned into
a progressive extracellular acidification, whose amplitude
was determined primarily by the duration of the
stimulation period (Figs 2B and 3B). In four slices tested,
TS stimulation did not evoke an initial alkalinization,
whereas the delayed fall in pHo was similar to that observed
in the other preparations (Fig. 3A).
The stimulus-evoked ion transients were accompanied by
decreases in tissue Po2 of 80-150 mmHg from a baseline of
90-200 mmHg, as measured with 02-sensitive microelectrodes at a depth similar to that used during the aK.
and pHo measurements (100-150 /sm; Fig. 2C). To obtain a
more detailed analysis of oxygen supply and consumption
under steady-state conditions, Po2 profiles were measured in
A
B
dorsal vagal cells 773
the DVNX of ten preparations (Fig. 2D). When the 02-
sensitive electrode was advanced in steps of 50 ,um towards
the upper surface of the slices, a consecutive fall in P02 was
observed. At the surface of the preparations, average P02
was 220 + 89 mmHg, which was considerably lower than
in the bulk solution of the experimental chamber (620-
700 mmHg; see Methods). P02 levels reached a minimum of
119 + 58 mmHg at a depth of 200-250 ,um within the
tissue and then increased again at recording depths of more
than 250 ,um. A mean P02 value of 219 + 103 mmHg was
revealed at the lower surface of the slices. No differences
were observed between Po2 profile measurements made with
02-sensitive microelectrodes with a tip diameter of 5-15 ,um
in Hepes-buffered solution and those made with Diamond
02-sensitive microelectrodes with a tip diameter of
20-40 ,um in both Hepes- or C02/HCO3 -buffered solutions.
700
:
E 350
0]
150 -
75
Ma
0~ ~ ~ ~ X 4 3-
72 2 _min
TS Anoxia
8 -
6 -
4 -
2-
0
TS
C
6*9 -
7-0 -
7-1 -
I
07
7-2
7-3 -
7-4 -
0
TS
Anoxia
Figure 3. Effects of anoxia on aKo, pHo and Po, in the DVNX
A, superfusion of N2-gassed solution led to a fall in bath P02, producing anoxia of the DVNX. This led to a
small aKo increase and a substantial fall in pHo. Stimulation of the solitary tract (TS; 50 V, 50 Hz, 10 s)
before and after recovery from anoxia evoked similar aK0 and pH0 transients. During anoxia, stimulusevoked aKo increases (B) and pHo decreases (C) were reduced in amplitude, as measured in different
preparations.
J Physiol. 495.3 Energy depletion in
K. Ballanyi, J Doutheil and J Brockhaus
recovery was complete after less than 8 min. In five
preparations, tetanic TS stimulation after recovery from
anoxia evoked transients of Po2, aK. and pH. similar to
those detected under control conditions (Fig. 3A). These
findings suggest that neuronal functions and ion homeostasis
in the DVNX are not profoundly disturbed by oxygen
depletion.
In order to identify the processes involved in the responses
to hypoglycaemia, the preparations were superfused with
glucose-free solutions. This produced a delayed slow rise in
aKo of 1-9 + 0-8 mM (n=6), as measured after 30 min
(Fig. 4). Under these conditions, a progressive increase in
pHo, which stabilized at levels 0X24 + 0 03 pH units more
alkaline than under control conditions, developed after a
delay of 8-25 min (n = 4). After such pre-incubation in
glucose-free salines, anoxic exposure resulted in a further
increase in aKo to 11 + 2-2 mm (n = 6; Fig. 4A), whereas
the anoxia-related decreases in pHo were almost completely
blocked (n = 4; Fig. 4B). These observations indicate that,
like anoxia, hypoglycaemia evokes only a minor
perturbance of K+ homeostasis but has opposite effects on
interstitial pH. Full blockade of metabolism appears to
result in a rapid blockade of homeostatic processes in the
DVNX.
Glial cells
The membrane potential of DVNX glial cells was recorded
with whole-cell patch-clamp techniques in order to study
the effects of metabolic challenges. In fifteen cells, a 5 min
These results show that the DVNs are under aerobic
conditions, and synaptic activation leads to neuronal EPSPs
and glial depolarizations as well as to ion and Po, changes,
similar to those described for in vitro preparations from
other brain regions (see Discussion).
Effects of energy depletion
To study the effects of metabolic disturbances on the
membrane properties and microenvironment of DVNX
cells, the slices were subjected to either oxygen or glucose
depletion. For analysis of the effects of complete substrate
depletion, which imitates ischaemia in vitro, anoxia was
evoked after pre-incubation in glucose-free solution.
P02, aKo and pHo
Superfusion with hypoxic saline for 5 min resulted in a
decrease in bath P02 to 8-50 mmHg (Fig. 3A). Following a
delay of 20-40 s after the onset of this fall in bath oxygen,
Po2 in the DVNX fell to around 0 mmHg over 15-30 s and
remained at this level throughout hypoxic exposure. This
led, after a delay of 30-60 s, to an increase in aKo, which
stabilized at a mean absolute level of 3 4 + 1 1 mm (n = 14),
and a fall in pH. of 0-24 + 0 04 pH units (n = 12). During
anoxia, the recovery of the stimulus-induced increases in
aKo was slowed (Fig. 3B) and the post-stimulus aKo
undershoot was blocked (n = 5). Furthermore, the magnitude
of the stimulus-induced fall in pHo was reduced by up to
50% (n = 5; Fig. 3C). Upon reoxygenation, Po2, aKo and
pHo began to return to their baselines within 30-60 s and
A
16 -
- 8-
E
0
yO
4-
2-
B
6-8 -
7-0 -
0
7-2-
7-4 -
Figure 4. Effects of blockade of metabolism on aK0 and pHo
After a delay of more than 10 min, baseline values of extracellular K+ and pH (aKO in A, pHo in B)
increased on exposure to oxygenated, glucose-free solutions. In this situation, a potentiation of the anoxiainduced rise in aKO, as revealed in the beginning of the recording, was detected whereas the parallel fall in
pHo was blocked.
- -_m
Anoxia Anoxia 5 min
0 glucose
- - -_ m
Anoxia Anoxia Anoxia 5 min
774 J Physiol.495.3
Energy depletion in dorsal vagal cells
period of anoxic exposure led to a mean depolarization of
9 + 3-8 mV (Fig. 5A). These anoxic depolarizations were
accompanied by a reduction in the amplitude and a slowing
of the recovery kinetics of the stimulus-evoked glial Em
responses (Fig. 5B). In five cells, recovery to resting
potential was preceded by a hyperpolarization of up to
5 mV in amplitude (Fig. 5A). In three glial cells, exposure to
glucose-free solution led to a delayed depolarization of
3-8 mV (Fig. 5C). Anoxic exposure of these cells after preincubation in glucose-free saline led to a depolarization with
an amplitude of up to 40 mV. Reoxygenation of the glucosefree solution resulted in a transient recovery of glial Em,
which included, in two cells, a post-anoxic hyperpolarization. On return to glucose-containing saline, glial
Em recovered to its control level (Fig. 5C). Almost identical
results were obtained with microelectrode recordings from
ten different cells. The results indicate that the membrane
properties of local glial cells are only moderately affected by
either oxygen or glucose depletion.
A
-70
E -80
LUE-90] Anoxia
B
-60
1_70
LE T
-80 -O O
TS
C 0 glu
-40
E-60
-80
Neurons
In order to analyse the effects of metabolic disturbances on
the membrane behaviour of DVNs, Em was recorded using
either whole-cell patch-clamp (n = 53) or microelectrode
(n = 65) techniques. Although Rm was significantly higher
in whole-cell recordings (267 ± 89 M52) than in microelectrode (96f4 + 68 M.Q) recordings, membrane properties
and responses of DVNs to energy depletion were very
similar. Accordingly, statistical analysis has been undertaken
on pooled data from microelectrode and patch-clamp
recordings.
Anoxia. In 38% (45 of 118) of DVNs, periods of anoxia of
5-20 min produced a stable hyperpolarization of 15-6 +
5 mV, which was accompanied by a decrease in Rm of
41 + 17% (Figs 6A and 8A). Seven of these cells hyperpolarized subsequent to recovery from an initial
depolarization of 1-2 mV in amplitude, which lasted about
1 min. In some DVNs, however, the anoxia-related hyperpolarization developed only after a delay of 5-10 min.
1 min
Anoxia 1 min
icose
I
5 min
5 min
Anoxia
Figure 5. Effects of energy depletion on Em of glial cells in the DVNX
A, oxygen depletion led to a depolarization which was followed by a post-anoxic hyperpolarization (dashed
line). B, the anoxic depolarization was accompanied by a decrease in the amplitude and a delay in the
recovery of Em changes elicited by stimulation of the solitary tract (TS; 50 V, 50 Hz, 10 s). C, superfusion
of oxygenated, glucose-free saline led, after about 8 min, to a depolarization of about 5 mV. Subsequent
anoxic exposure elicited a progressive depolarization, which recovered on reoxygenation and included a
pronounced after-hyperpolarization (dashed line). A further Em recovery occurred on return to oxygenated
glucose-containing solution.
J Phy8iol. 495.3 775
K. Ballanyi, J Doutheil and J Brockhaus
These hyperpolarizations resulted in a complete blockade of
spontaneous action potential discharge (Fig. 6A). Action
potentials, evoked by injection of DC pulses were also blocked
during anoxia (Fig. 6B). However, these cells remained
excitable during anoxia, since responses similar to those
under control conditions could be elicited by increasing
stimulus strength (not illustrated). To study the ionic
mechanism of the oxygen-dependent hyperpolarizations,
I-V relations of steady-state Em responses to injection of
DC pulses were analysed. In the example shown in Fig. 6C,
the control I- V relation and that obtained during anoxia or
glucose depletion intersected at -78 mV. This Em value
represents the reversal potential (Erv) of the anoxiainduced hyperpolarization, which averaged -73-8 + 4-4 mV
(n = 5).
In thirty different DVNs, anoxic exposure for 5-20 min
evoked a stable depolarization of less than 10 mV and a
concomitant decrease in Rm of 26 + 8% (Fig. 7). In these
cells, the frequency of spontaneous action potential
discharges increased during the initial phase of anoxia
(Fig. 7B) and decreased after more than 5 min of oxygen
A
5]E
E
Lu
depletion. In forty-four further DVNs, anoxic exposure did
not lead to a major change in resting Em or spike discharge.
Finally, in nine non-spontaneously active DVNs anoxia
produced a depolarization of 4-10 mV, which could evoke
spike discharge (Fig. 7C). During the first minute after
reoxygenation, a hyperpolarization of up to 15 mV
amplitude, which was not accompanied by a further
decrease in Rm, was detected in about 30% of DVNs
(Fig. 7A). Neither the depolarizing (n = 4) nor the hyperpolarizing (n = 4) responses to anoxia were affected by
addition of 0 5-1 uLM tetrodotoxin (TTX) and/or 1 mM
Mn2+ to the superfusion fluid (Fig. 7C).
Glucose depletion. In twelve of fifteen DVNs that hyperpolarized during anoxia, superfusion with glucose-free
solution led, after a delay of 12-60 min, to a very similar
hyperpolarization and Rm decrease to that during anoxia,
which could be stable for more than 1 h. In the remaining
three cells, glucose depletion for 1 h did not affect Em or Rm.
In DVNs that did not hyperpolarize under anoxia, Em and
Rm were either not affected by a 1 h exposure to glucose-free
superfusates (n = 14) or were depolarized by less than
-25
-50
-75 -
Anoxia
B
Control Anoxia
0 glucose
C
-40
-50 -
-t -70 - E
LU -709i -30
-70
50
a 0
1--50-.
-50
-60
E -70
0 glucose
-..m
250 ms
-80
-50 -
- 70 1
-90-
-90
-100
m
2 min
I (pA)
-80 -40 0 40
Control
Anoxia
0 glucose
0 glucose +
tolbutamide
Figure 6. Oxygen- and glucose-dependent hyperpolarizations of DVNs
A, superfusion of glucose-free saline led to hyperpolarization and a decrease in membrane resistance (Rm),
measured by regular injection of hyperpolarizing current pulses. A similar hyperpolarization and blockade
of spontaneous action potential discharges were revealed by anoxia. B, the anoxia- and glucose-dependent
hyperpolarizations and Rm decreases led to blockade of current-evoked action potentials. C, intersections of
the I- V curves during control, anoxia and glucose depletion indicate the reversal potential
(Erev = -78 mV) of the metabolism-related hyperpolarizations. The I-V relation in glucose-free solutions
recovered after addition of tolbutamide. Recordings in A, B and C are from different preparations.
776 J Phy8iol.495.3
Energy depletion in dorsal vagal cells
10 mV with a concomitant decrease in Rm of less than 30%
(n = 4). The glucose-dependent hyperpolarizations had a
mean Erev of-68&2 + 8-1 mV (n = 4).
To test, whether KATP channels mediate these hyperpolarizations, the effects of modulators of these channels
were investigated (Ashcroft & Ashcroft, 1990). Tolbutamide
at 100-500 lM (n = 9) led to a complete recovery of Em, Rm
and spontaneous spike activity (Fig. 8). However, the
development of a progressive depolarization was never
observed during maintained anoxia or glucose depletion
after addition of the KATP channel blockers. Similar results
were obtained in twelve cells on addition of 20-100 /LM
glibenclamide to hypoxic or glucose-free solutions (Fig. 9). In
contrast to tolbutamide, the effects of glibenclamide were
almost irreversible. In six DVNs, anoxia (n = 2) or glucose
depletion (nv= 4) led to a hyperpolarization that developed
A a
-40 -
E -50
slowly over more than 10 min and was not accompanied by
a major change in Rm. In these cells, both tolbutamide and
glibenclamide were ineffective in reversing the hyperpolarization (not illustrated). In five of seven DVNs that
responded to anoxia or glucose depletion with a rapid hyperpolarization and a major Rm decrease, addition of
400-500 /lM of the KATP channel activator diazoxide to
oxygenated solutions led to a similar response (Fig. 9).
Administration of diazoxide for periods of more than 2 min
could lead to hyperpolarizations which were maintained for
more than 1 h. Figure 9C shows that such hyperpolarizations could be reversed by the sulphonylureas. In
five cells that did not hyperpolarize during anoxia,
diazoxide did not affect spike activity, Em or Rm.
Ischaemia. The combined effects of anoxia and glucose
depletion, which imitates ischaemia in vitro, were
a b c
-30 -i
It-50
LU
C
-40 -
-60 -
L -
80
i
1 /IM TTX. 1 mM Mn2+
.I15 min
-4 1---
l
Anoxia 1 min
Figure 7. Effects of anoxia on non-hyperpolarizing DVNs
A and B, anoxia led to a decrease in membrane resistance (Rm), a small depolarization and a reduction in
the ampltitude of the spike after-hyperpolarization. These effects are illustrated in B at higher time
resolution. Note the post-anoxic hyperpolarization in A. C, in this DVN, which had a rather negative
membrane potential (Em), anoxia resulted in a depolarization of about 7 mV, leading to action potential
discharges. The right panel illustrates that the depolarization persisted after blockade of synaptic
transmission by addition of tetrodotoxin and Mn2+.
B
J. Physiol.495.3 777
K. Ballanyi, J Douthe
investigated in a final set of experiments. As illustrated in
Fig. 10, a stable hyperpolarization and decrease in Rm were
observed during either anoxia or glucose depletion in four of
six DVNs. In these cells, the glucose-dependent hyperpolarizations turned into a progressive depolarization on
simultaneous anoxic exposure. The ischaemic depolarization
was accompanied by a further decrease in Rm to less than
15% of the control value. After reoxygenation of the
glucose-free saline, Em recovered to its hyperpolarized level
despite the continuous absence of glucose. Return to
oxygenated, glucose-containing saline led to a full recovery
of Em, Rm and spontaneous action potential discharges. A
very similar progressive depolarization was revealed when
the same ischaemic protocol was used in those two DVNs
that did not hyperpolarize during anoxia or pre-incubation
in glucose-free superfusate (not illustrated).
A
-30 -
E
-50 -
E
-70-
B
-30-
5fl- UE -50 rz
_70
?il and J Brockhaus J. Physiol.495.3
These findings show that subpopulations of DVNs differ in
their behaviour during metabolic challenges. The moderate
hyperpolarizing or depolarizing responses to either oxygen
or glucose depletion are, however, similar in individual cells.
As in the local glial cells, progressive depolarizations only
occur on complete blockade of substrate supply in DVNs.
DISCUSSION
Oxygen supply and utilization
In oxygenated solutions, steady-state Po2, which had a
value of about 200 mmHg at the surface of the brainstem
slices, reached a minimum of 100 mmHg in the DVNX at a
depth of 200 ,um. Similar P02 profiles have been reported for
slice preparations from different brain regions under
comparable in vitro conditions (for references, see Brockhaus
1 00 uM tolbutamide
0 glucose 2 min
A xb 2 mc 1m d
Anoxia 2 min
C
-30 -
E
7U 0 -l
f-7
a b
1: 1
J1 c d
02 s
40OpA 40OpA
Figure 8. Tolbutamide blockade of metabolism-related hyperpolarizations of DVNs
A, after 27 min of pre-incubation in glucose-free saline, a hyperpolarization and decrease in Rm, measured
by regular injection of hyperpolarizing current pulses, was revealed. The hyperpolarization and the
blockade of spontaneous action potential discharge were reversed by addition of tolbutamide. B, in a
different DVN, tolbutamide had very similar effects on the anoxia-induced hyperpolarization. C illustrates
spontaneous (a and b) and current-induced (c and d) action potentials of the cell in B at higher time
resolution.
I~~~~~~~~~~
778
Energy depletion in dorsal vagal cells
et al. 1993). These tissue Po2 levels, which are considerably
lower than the P02 in the superfusate, can be attributed to
oxygen consumption, since blockade of aerobic metabolism
with cyanide abolishes the 02 gradients (Brockhaus et al.
1993). Our results show that DVNX cells in the brainstem
slices are under aerobic conditions. Superficial DVNs are
even hyperoxic relative to the in vivo situation, since
interstitial P02 typically ranges between 90 and near
0 mmHg in the brain (Leniger-Follert, Lubbers & Wrabetz,
1975; Grote, Zimmer & Schubert, 1981). The finding that
P02 can be lower than 2 mmHg during normoxia in vivo can
be explained by a high metabolic rate and pronounced
spontaneous activity of the majority of neurons in the intact
brain (Hansen, 1985; Richter & Ballanyi, 1996). Consistent
with this, it has been shown that electrical stimulation of
the vagus nerve produces a transient fall in P02 of up to
40 mmHg in respiratory regions of the medulla of adult
cats (Richter & Acker, 1989). The amplitude and kinetics of
these activity-induced decreases in Po2 are very similar to
those revealed by stimulation of the spinal cord in the
vicinity of respiratory neurons in the isolated medulla of
neonatal rats (Brockhaus et al. 1993) and to those described
in the present study. In the isolated neonatal respiratory
network, it was confirmed that such Po, decreases are
caused by activation of neuronal structures, since TTX led
to complete suppression of such transients and of
concomitant increases in aK. (Brockhaus et al. 1993). The
observation in the latter study that blockade of synaptic
transmission with Mn2+ led to a reduction in the transients
of Po2 and aKo of about 80% suggests that EPSPs are
responsible for the major portion of these changes in the
neuronal microenvironment. A similar conclusion was
A
S -30 -
E _50 -
E
U70 Iliii 111111 III! III IIIl III III III III II III jlllll l illlllqlllu 11 III
I - 1
400 pM diazoxide 1 min
B 0 glucose
S -30 -
E _50 _IL-.
u -30 -
E _50 A
S ..L -A L
m
2 min
50 min
I " ---- -.I
500 /iM diazoxide
- m
20 /iM glibenclamide 2 min
Figure 9. Antagonistic effects of diazoxide and glibenclamide on Em of DVNs
A, bath-application of diazoxide led to a hyperpolarization and fall in Rm, measured by regular injection of
hyperpolarizing current pulses. These effects were accompanied by reversible blockade of spontaneous
action potential discharges. B, in a different DVN, a persistent hyperpolarization and Rm decrease developed
after 18 min pre-incubation in glucose-free solution. After re-addition of glucose, recovery of Em and Rm
was incomplete, leading to suppression of spontaneous spike discharge. In the continuation of this
recording in C, application of diazoxide led to a hyperpolarization and Rm decrease which did not recover
over about 1 h, whereas addition of glibenclamide resulted in a rapid recovery of Em, Rm and spontaneous
activity. The irregular voltage deflections in B and C are due to measurements of I- V relations.
J Physiol.495.3 779
K. Ballanyi, J Doutheil and J Brockhaus
drawn from a comparable reduction in stimulus-evoked aKo
rises in the nucleus of the solitary tract on superfusion of
high Mg2+-low Ca2+ solutions (Ballanyi et al. 1993).
Glutamatergic EPSPs, evoked by tetanic stimulation similar
to that of the DVN (Travagli et al. 1991), produce a
considerable increase in intracellular Na+ (for references, see
Ballanyi et al. 1984; Ballanyi, 1995). An activity-related
rise in aKo of up to 9 mm, as observed in the DVNX in the
present study, is likely to be mirrored by an increase in
intracellular Na+ of similar magnitude (Ballanyi et al. 1984).
This rise in intracellular Nae leads to activation of the
neuronal Na+-K+ pump and thus to consumption of ATP
and stimulation of aerobic ATP synthesis (Ballanyi et al.
1984; Hansen, 1985; Ballanyi, 1995). Administration of the
selective inhibitor strophanthidine showed that the greatest
portion of activity-induced oxygen consumption in the bee
retina is, indeed, due to the Na+-K+ pump (Tsacopoulos &
A
-40 -
.-I
E
E1
-60 -
-80 -
-100 -
Poitry, 1982). In addition to activation of the Na+-K+
pump, a rise in intracellular Ca!+, caused by influx through
voltage-sensitive CaP+ channels and/or glutamate receptors,
is likely to stimulate aerobic metabolism. The intracellular
Ca2+ rise could produce a secondary elevation of intramitochondrial CaP, leading to stimulation of mitochondrial
enzymes (e.g. McCormack, Halestrap & Denton, 1990;
Duchen, 1992). In accordance with this, a recent study has
revealed that spontaneous and evoked activity leads to a
substantial rise in intracellular Ca2+ in DVNs (S. Trapp & K.
Ballanyi, unpublished observations). Finally, the profound
rise in aKo in the DVNX might per se activate the Na+-K+
pump of the adjacent glial cells (Ballanyi, 1995). This glial
activity could also contribute to 02 consumption.
Effects of metabolic disturbances on ion homeostasis
The decrease in tissue Po2 to 0 mmHg indicates anoxia of
the DVNX during exposure to hypoxic solutions. Such
0 glucose
25 min
Anoxia
B
m
4 min Anoxia
0 glucose
I I
-40 --
E _50 1--
-60
Anoxia
U
14 min
111111111111I p
2min
2 min Anoxia
Figure 10. Effects of blockade of metabolism on Em of DVNs
A, at the start of this microelectrode recording, anoxia caused a hyperpolarization, a decrease in Rm,
measured by regular injection of hyperpolarizing current pulses, and blockade of spontaneous action
potential discharges. Similar responses were revealed, after a delay of about 30 min, after superfusion of
oxygenated glucose-free saline. In this situation, anoxia led to a rapid depolarization and a further Rm
decrease, which recovered on reoxygenation of the glucose-free solution. Subsequent addition of glucose led
to full recovery of Em, Rm and spike activity to their control values. B, very similar results were obtained
during whole-cell recording from a different DVN.
780 J Physiol.495.3
Energy depletion in dorsal vagal cells
anoxia evoked a mean rise in aKo of less than 2 mm. This
elevation of interstitial K+ is partly due to K+ efflux
through the KATP channels of the DVNs, which are
activated by anoxia (see below). The observation that the
recovery of the evoked aKo transients was considerably
slowed and the post-stimulus K+ undershoot was blocked
during oxygen depletion suggests that Na+-K+ pump
activity is also reduced. This is also indicated by the postanoxic undershoot of aKO, which represents enforced
activation of the pump on reoxygenation (see also Ballanyi
et al. 1984; Brockhaus et al. 1993). The magnitude of these
modest anoxia-induced aKo rises is less than 10% of those
reported for different cortical brain structures during
anoxia/ischaemia in vivo (Hansen, 1985; Haddad & Jiang,
1993). This is, however, not due to the in vitro conditions of
the slices, since increases in aKo to more than 20 mM have
been found during anoxia in slice preparations of the
guinea-pig hippocampus (Hansen et al. 1982) and in the rat
medullary hypoglossal motonucleus (Xia, Jiang & Haddad,
1992). In the latter study, however, in the hypoglossal
nucleus of newborn rats and in slices of the adult turtle
brain anoxia led to only a minor aKo increase. The authors
concluded that this moderate anoxic disturbance of ion
homeostasis is related to the well-established anoxia tolerance
of newborn mammals and cold-blooded vertebrates (Sick,
Rosenthal, LaManna & Lutz, 1982; Haddad & Jiang, 1993;
Brockhaus et al. 1993; Richter & Ballanyi, 1996). In these
animals, potentiated anaerobic glycolysis (the 'Pasteureffect'), in concert with a rather low metabolic rate, appears
to be sufficient to maintain ion homeostasis and neuronal
functions (Duffy, Kohle & Vannucci, 1975; Sick et al. 1982;
Haddad & Jiang, 1993; Brockhaus et al. 1993; Ballanyi &
Richter, 1996). In agreement with the assumption of
effective utilization of anaerobic metabolism in the DVNX,
a major perturbance of K+ homeostasis was revealed only
after pre-incubation of the slices in glucose-free saline,
resulting in a potentiation of the anoxic K+ release (see also
Jiang & Haddad, 1992).
Anoxia-induced stimulation of anaerobic glycolysis is
indicated by the decrease in pHo, which has also been found
in a variety of in vivo and in vitro preparations of
mammalian nervous tissues (for references, see Hansen,
1985; Chesler, 1990; Richter & Ballanyi, 1996). The
extracellular acidification reflects a fall in intracellular pH in
the DVNs of about 0 2 pH units (Trapp, Liickermann,
Brooks & Ballanyi, 1996a; see also Silver & Erecinska,
1990). The extra- and intracellular pH decreases most
probably result from anaerobic lactate production and H+
formation during oxygen depletion (Hansen, 1985; Chesler,
1990). This is confirmed by the observed blockade of the
anoxia-related fall in pHo after removal of glucose as the
substrate for lactate production, as has also been described
for rat hippocampal slices (Krnjevic & Walz, 1990). The
increase in pH0 baseline in glucose-free solutions further
suggests that anaerobic metabolism is, at least partly,
responsible for the rather acidic pH. baseline values in
oxygenated solution (Chesler, 1990).
Proton formation due to anaerobic metabolism might also
contribute to the delayed fall in pHo on TS stimulation, as
was previously suggested for hippocampal slices (Walz,
1989). More recent findings suggest that a major portion of
this acidification is caused by accumulation of interstitial
C02, indicating 'respiratory acidosis' related to neuronal
activity (Voipio & Kaila, 1993). The early alkaline shift of
pHo on TS stimulation might well be due to an influx of
Ca2P, which leads to activation of a plasmalemmal ATPase,
extruding internal Ca2+ for external protons (for references,
see Trapp et al. 1996a; Trapp, Liickermann, Kaila &
Ballanyi, 1996b). However, transmembrane fluxes of acidbase equivalents through ion channels or activation of glial
Na+-HCO3- cotransport might also be involved (Chesler,
1990).
Effects of metabolic disturbances on DVNs
In a major population of DVNs, anoxia caused a persistent
hyperpolarization and decrease in Rm. The similarities of
Erev and the blockade by the sulphonylureas (Ashcroft &
Ashcroft, 1990) are consistent with the recent finding in
thin brainstem slices, that the anoxic outward current of
DVNs is due to activation of ATP-sensitive K+ (KATP)
channels (Trapp & Ballanyi, 1995). The observations that
the Erev of the glucose-dependent hyperpolarizations was
also close to the estimated equilibrium potential for K+
(Trapp & Ballanyi, 1995; see also Spuler, Endres & Grafe,
1988; Murphy & Greenfield, 1992; Nieber et al. 1995) and
that sulphonylureas blocked these hyperpolarizations
indicate that KATP channels also mediate this response. As
discussed in detail elsewhere, a complex set of cellular
constituents seems to determine the activity state of these
metabolism-related K+ channels (Trapp & Ballanyi, 1995;
see also Terzic, Kung & Kurachi, 1994). For example, it was
reported for muscle tissue that lactate, as well as the anoxiainduced fall in pHi, counteract ATP inhibition of KATP
channels, even in the presence of millimolar concentrations
of intracellular ATP (Terzic et al. 1994). We showed recently
that anoxia-induced activation of KATP channels in DVNs is
observed prior to the accompanying fall in intracellular pH
and that reoxygenation leads to inactivation of these
channels when the cells are still subject to a substantial
intracellular acidosis (Trapp et al. 1996a). In the present
study, activation of KATP channels in response to glucosefree solutions occurred despite a rise in pHo, indicating an
intracellular alkalosis due to decreased lactate production
and H+ formation (see above). This almost excludes the
possibility that lactate or protons are primarily involved in
the activation of KATP channels in the DVNs, as has been
previously suggested for smooth muscle (Heaton, Wray &
Eisner, 1993). The anoxia- and glucose-dependent activation
J Physiol.495.3 781
K. Ballanyi, J Doutheil and J Brockhaus
of KATP channels in the present study was observed not
only during recordings with microelectrodes, but also with
patch-electrodes containing ATP (see also Trapp & Ballanyi,
1995). This supports the above assumption that changes in
the intracellular milieu as, for example, elicited by oxygen
or glucose depletion might be sufficient to overcome the
physiological ATP block of these metabolism-gated channels,
even on dialysis of the cells with millimolar concentrations
of ATP (Trapp & Ballanyi, 1995).
In the presence of glucose, blockade of KATP channels by
sulphonylurea did not lead to a progressive anoxic
depolarization in DVNs, as has been reported for cortical
neurons (Hansen et al. 1982; Hansen, 1985; Haddad &
Jiang, 1993). This confirms recent suggestions (Trapp &
Ballanyi, 1995) that these channels might not have a
protective function during anoxia as hypothesized
previously (Hansen, 1985; Hochachka, 1986; Haddad &
Jiang, 1993). In the DVN, they could possibly serve as
glucose sensors, as was also suggested for other central
neurons (Ashford et al. 1990). Glucose-dependent 'functional
inactivation' of tonic activity of DVNs innervating fl-cells
of the pancreas (Loewy & Spyer, 1990), might be relevant
for adjustment of insulin, and thus glucose levels, in the
brain (Trapp & Ballanyi, 1995).
Those DVNs that did not hyperpolarize during anoxia or
glucose depletion, do not appear to possess functional KATP
channels, since diazoxide, an activator of these channels,
did not mimic the metabolism-related hyperpolarizations.
These neurons also have a high tolerance to energy
depletion, since they either were not or were only modestly
depolarized and spontaneous activity was not severely
impaired. Since pHo decreased during anoxia and increased
on glucose depletion, variations of extracellular pH in the
range of 0 5 pH units do not seem to hamper basic
excitability. These results confirm previous findings of a
high tolerance of DVNs to changes of intracellular pH
(Trapp et al. 1996a). On the basis of our results, we cannot
determine whether the metabolism-related modest
depolarizations are mediated by the combined effects of an
increase in Ca2P currents and inhibition of A-type K+
currents (Cowan & Martin, 1992) or whether they might be
secondary to the accompanying increase in aKo.
The percentage distribution of depolarizing, hyperpolarizing
and non-responding DVNs in the present study was
comparable to that previously found in conventional 'thick'
(Cowan & Martin, 1992) and thin brainstem slices (Trapp &
Ballanyi, 1995). In agreement with these studies, no
progressive depolarizations (causing aK. increases of more
than 20 mM) were detected during anoxia or glucose
depletion, as has been reported recently (Donnelly, Jiang &
Haddad, 1992). We can only speculate that this discrepancy
is due to differences in experimental conditions, since the
latter observations were made in brainstem slices kept at
35-36 °C in an interface-type recording chamber (Donnelly
et al. 1992). However, under the in vitro conditions of the
present study, neurons of the hypoglossal motonucleus,
neighbouring the DVNX, showed progressive depolarizations
(Doutheil et al. 1992) comparable to those reported by
Donnelly et al. (1992). A similar depolarization was observed
in the present study in DVNs during complete blockade of
metabolism. Interestingly, such depolarizations also
developed in cells recorded with patch electrodes containing
ATP. This indicates that distubance of electrical membrane
function, as revealed by the 'ischaemia'-induced depolarizing
conductance, is mediated by a deleterious cascade of cellular
events, which does not depend solely on ATP (for references,
see Hansen, 1985; Haddad & Jiang, 1993). Besides this
aspect, future studies will need to address the question of
which metabolic fuel is responsible for the recovery from the
ischaemic depolarization observed on reoxygenation of the
glucose-free solution.
Effects of metabolic disturbances on glial cells
During anoxia, glial cells were depolarized by about 10 mV.
On the basis of the high glial K+ conductance (Ballanyi,
1995), this depolarization corresponds to that expected,
according to the Nernst relation, for the rise in aKo during
anoxia. A passive glial response rather than an active
depolarization is also suggested by the similarities of the
glial post-anoxic hyperpolarization with the corresponding
aKo undershoot (compare Figs 3B and 5A). After preincubation in glucose-free solutions, the prominent
depolarization of more than 30 mV might, however, partly be
due to a (non-selective) increase in membrane permeability
and/or blockade of Na+-K+ pump, as has been seen in
cultured astrocytes during pharmacological blockade of
metabolism (Harold & Walz, 1992). In agreement with our
results, Harold & Walz (1992) showed that inhibition of
either aerobic or anaerobic metabolism only produced minor
depolarizations in these cultured cells, which are not
influenced by neuronal K+ release.
Conclusions
Neurons and glial cells of the dorsal vagal nucleus do not
respond with progressive depolarizations to either anoxia or
glucose depletion. This suggests a high tolerance to energy
depletion by this medullary brain region of mature rats.
This tolerance is also reflected in the observation that
cellular mechanisms of ion homeostasis are only slightly
perturbed under these conditions. As in cold-blooded
vertebrates and neonatal mammals, this tolerance might be
due to effective utilization of anaerobic energy metabolism
in combination with a low metabolic rate. These properties
might be functionally relevant, in particular, for providing
an adaptive central nervous mechanism, which serves to
regulate brain glucose levels during hypoglycaemia.
782 J Physiol. 495.3
J Physiol. 495.3 Energy depletion in dorsal vagal cells 783
ASHCROFT, S. J. H. & ASHCROFT, F. M. (1 990). Properties and
functions of ATP-sensitive K-channels. Cellular Signalling 2,
197-214.
ASHFORD, M. L. J., BODEN, P. R. & TREHERNE, J. M. (1990).
Tolbutamide excites rat glucoreceptive ventromedial hypothalamic
neurones by indirect inhibition of ATP-K+ channels. British Journal
of Pharmacology 101, 531-540.
BALLANYI, K. (1995). Modulation of glial K', Na+ and CF- activities
by the extracellular milieu. In Neuroglial Cells, ed. KETTENMANN,
H. & RANSOM, B. R., pp. 289-298. Oxford University Press, New
York.
BALLANYI, K., BRANCHEREAU, P., CHAMPAGNAT, J., FORTIN, G. &
VELLUTI, J. (1993). Extracellular potassium, glial and neuronal
potentials in the solitary complex of rat brainstem slices. Brain
Research 607, 99-107.
BALLANYI, K., DOUTHEIL, J. & RICHTER, D. W. (1992a). Effects of
hypoxia and glucose depletion on rat dorsal vagal motoneurons in
vitro. In Rhythmogenesis in Neurons and Networks: Proceedings of
the 20th Gottingen Neurobiology Conference, ed. ELSNER, N. &
RICHTER, D. W., p. 605s. Thieme, Stuttgart.
BALLANYI, K., GRAFE, P., REDDY, M. M. & TEN BRUGGENCATE, G.
(1984). Different types of potassium transport linked to carbachol
and y-aminobutyric acid actions in rat sympathetic neurons.
Neuroscience 12, 917-927.
BALLANYI, K., KUIPERS, U., DOUTHEIL, J. & RICHTER, D. W (1992 b).
Microenvironment of dorsal vagal motoneurons in rat during energy
depletion. Pfluigers Archiv 420, R23.
BROCKHAUS, J., BALLANYI, K., SMITH, J. C. & RICHTER, D. W. (1993).
Microenvironment of respiratory neurons in the in vitro brainstemspinal cord of neonatal rats. Journal of Physiology 462, 421-445.
CHESLER, M. (1990). The regulation and modulation of pH in the
nervous system. Progress in Neurobiology 34, 401-427.
COWAN, A. I. & MARTIN, R. L. (1992). Ionic basis of membrane
potential changes induced by anoxia in rat dorsal vagal
motoneurones. Journal of Physiology 455, 89-109.
DONNELLY, D. F., JIANG, C. & HADDAD, G. G. (1992). Comparative
responses of brain stem and hippocampal neurons to 02 deprivation:
in vitro intracellular studies. American Journal of Physiology 262,
549-554.
DOUTHEIL, J., BALLANYI, K. & RICHTER, D. W. (1992). Differential
sensitivity of cranial motoneurons in rat brainstem slices to energy
deprivation. Pfluigers Archiv 420, R24.
DUCHEN, M. R. (1992). Ca2+-dependent changes in the mitochondrial
energetics in single dissociated mouse sensory neurons. Biochemical
Journal 283, 41-50.
DUFFY, T. E., KOHLE, S. J. & VANNUCCI, R. C. (1975). Carbohydrate
and energy metabolism in perinatal rat brain: relation to survival in
anoxia. Journal of Neurochemistry 24, 271-276.
GROTE, J., ZIMMER, K. & SCHUBERT, R. (1981). Effects of severe
arterial hypocapnia on regional blood flow regulation in the brain
cortex of cats. Pfluigers Archiv 391, 195-199.
HADDAD, G. G. & JIANG, C. (1993). 02 deprivation in the central
nervous system: on mechanisms of neuronal response, differential
sensitivity and injury. Progress in Neurobiology 40, 277-318.
HANSEN, A. J. (1985). Effect of anoxia on ion distribution in the brain.
Physiological Reviews 65,101-148.
HANSEN, A. J., HOUNSGAARD, J. & JAHNSEN, H. (1982). Anoxia
increases potassium conductance in hippocampal nerve cells. Acta
Physiologica Scandinavica 115, 301-310.
HAROLD, D. E. & WALZ, W. (1992). Metabolic inhibition and electrical
properties of type-i-like cortical astrocytes. Neuroscience 47,
203-211.
HEATON, R. C., WRAY, S. & EISNER, D. A. (1993). Effects of metabolic
inhibition and changes of intracellular pH on potassium
permeability and contraction of rat uterus. Journal of Physiology
465, 43-56.
HOCHACHKA, P. W. (1986). Defense strategies against hypoxia and
hypothermia. Science 231, 234-241.
JIANG, C. & HADDAD, G. G. (1992). Differential responses of
neocortical neurons to glucose and/or 02 deprivation in the human
and rat. Journal of Neurophysiology 68, 2165-2173.
KRNJEVIC, K. & WALZ, W. (1990). Acidosis and blockade of
orthodromic responses caused by anoxia in rat hippocampal slices at
different temperatures. Journal of Physiology 422, 127-144.
LENIGER-FOLLERT, E., LUBBERS, D. W. & WRABETZ, W. (1975).
Regulation of local tissue PO. of the brain cortex at different arterial
02 pressures. Pfliigers Archiv 359, 81-95.
LOEWY, A. D. & SPYER, K. M. (1990). Vagal preganglionic neurons. In
Central Regulation of Autonomic Functions, ed. LOEWY, A. D. &
SPYER, K. M., pp. 68-87. Oxford University Press, New York.
MCCORMACK, J. G., HALESTRAP, A. P. & DENTON, R. M. (1990). Role
of calcium ions in regulation of mammalian intramitochondrial
metabolism. Physiological Reviews 70, 391-425.
MURPHY, K. P. S. J. & GREENFIELD, S. A. (1992). Neuronal selectivity
of ATP-sensitive potassium channels in guinea-pig substantia nigra
revealed by responses to anoxia. Journal of Physiology 453,
167-183.
NIEBER, K., SEVCIK, J. & ILLES, P. (1995). Hypoxic changes in rat
locus coeruleus neurons in vitro. Journal of Physiology 486, 33-46.
RICHTER, D. W. & ACKER, H. (1989). Respiratory neuron behaviour
during medullary hypoxia. In Chemoreceptors and Reflexes in
Breathing: Cellular and Molecular Aspects, ed. LAHIRI, S.,
pp. 267-274. Oxford University Press, New York.
RICHTER, D. W. & BALLANYI, K. (1996). Response of the medullary
respiratory network to hypoxia: a comparative analysis of neonatal
and adult mammals. In Tissue Oxygen Deprivation: Developmental,
Molecular and Integrated Function, ed. HADDAD, G. G. & LISTER,
G., pp. 751-777. Marcel Dekker Inc.
SICK, T. J., ROSENTHAL, M., LAMANNA, J. C. & LUTZ, P. L. (1982).
Brain potassium homeostasis, anoxia, and metabolic inhibition in
turtles and rats. American Journal of Physiology 243, R281-288.
SILVER, I. A. & ERECINSKA, M. (1990). Intracellular and extracellular
changes of [Ca2+] in hypoxia and ischemia in rat brain in vivo.
Journal of General Physiology 95, 837-866.
SPULER, A., ENDRES, W. & GRAFE, P. (1988). Glucose depletion
hyperpolarizes guinea pig hippocampal neurons by an increase in
potassium conductance. Experimental Neurology 100, 248-252.
TERZIC, A., TUNG, R. T. & KURACHI, Y. (1994). Nucleotide regulation
of ATP sensitive potassium channels. Cardiovascular Research 28,
746-753.
TRAPP, S. & BALLANYI, K. (1995). KATP channels mediate anoxic
outward current in rat dorsal vagal neurons in vitro. Journal of
Physiology 487, 37-50.
TRAPP, S., LtCKERMANN, M., BROOKS, P. A. & BALLANYI, K. (1996a).
Acidosis of rat dorsal vagal neurons in situ during spontaneous and
evoked activity. Journal of Physiology (in the Press).
TRAPP, S., LUCKERMANN, M., KAILA, K. & BALLANYI, K. (1996b).
Acidosis of hippocampal neurons mediated by a plasmalemmal
Ca2+/H+ pump. NeuroReport (in the Press).
K. Ballanyi, J Doutheil and J Brockhaus
TRAVAGLI, R. A., GILLIS, R. A., RossITER, C. D. & VICINI, S. (1991).
Glutamate and GABA-mediated synaptic currents in neurons of the
rat dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus. American Journal of
Physiology 260, G531-536.
TSACOPOULOS, M. & POITRY, S. (1982). Kinetics of oxygen
consumption after a single flash of light in photoreceptors of the
drone. Journal of General Physiology 80, 19-55.
VoIpIo, J. & KAILA, K. (1993). Interstitial Pco, and pH in
hippocampal slices measured by means of a novel fast CO2/H+-
sensitive microelectrode based on a PVC-gelled membrane. Pfluigers
Archiv 423, 193-201.
WALZ, W. (1989). pH shifts evoked by neuronal stimulation in slices of
rat hippocampus. Canadian Journal of Physiology and Pharmacology
67, 577-581.
XIA, Y., JIANG, C. & HADDAD, G. G. (1992). Oxidative and glycolytic
pathways in rat (newborn and adult) and turtle brain: role during
anoxia. American Journal of Physiology 262, R595-603.
Acknowledgements
The study was supported by the Sander Stiftung and the DFG
(Heisenberg-Program to KB.). We thank Dr D. W. Richter for
helpful comments on the manuscript and Dr U. Kuipers for
participating in some of the experiments.
Author's present address
J. Doutheil: Max-Planck-Institut fur Neurologische Forschung,
Gleuelerstrasse, 50, 50931 Koln, Germany.
Author's email address
K. Ballanyi: kb@neuro-physiol.med.uni-goettingen.de
Received 4 January 1996; accepted 24 May 1996.
784 J Phy8iol.495.3



Microcirculation, 13: 353–363, 2006
Copyright c 2006 Taylor & Francis Group, LLC
ISSN: 1073-9688 print / 1549-8719 online
DOI: 10.1080/10739680600745778
Electrotonic Transmission Within Pericyte-Containing
Retinal Microvessels
DAVID M. WU,∗,† MASAHIRO MINAMI,∗ HAJIME KAWAMURA,∗ AND DONALD G. PURO∗,†,‡
∗Department of Ophthalmology & Visual Sciences, †Neuroscience Graduate Program and
‡Department of Molecular & Integrative Physiology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor,
Michigan, USA
ABSTRACT
Objective: Little is known about the electrotonic architecture of the pericyte-containing retinal microvasculature. Here, the authors focus on the cell-to-cell transmission of hyperpolarization, which
can induce abluminal pericytes to relax and lumens to dilate.
Methods: With perforated-patch pipettes, the authors monitored the membrane potentials and ionic
currents of pairs of pericytes located on freshly isolated rat retinal microvessels. Voltage changes were
induced by administering electrical stimuli into pericytes, miniperfusing the KATP channel opener
pinacidil, or using oxotremorine to activate chloride channels.
Results: Suggestive of extensive cell-to-cell communication, spontaneous voltage changes were strikingly similar in widely separated pericytes. In addition, injection of current into one of a pair of
sampled pericytes always elicited a voltage response in the other sampled pericyte; the gap junction
uncoupler, heptanol, blocked this transmission. In the dual recordings, hyperpolarization spreading
from a current-injected pericyte decayed ∼40% within 100 µm. In contrast, pinacidil-induced hyperpolarizations diminished by only ∼2% in 100 µm. Depolarizations also appeared to spread with
similar transmission efficacies.
Conclusions: Based on the experiments, the authors propose that key features of the electrotonic
architecture of retinal microvessels include highly efficient cell-to-cell communication within the endothelium and relatively inefficient transmission at pericyte/endothelial junctions. Thus, the endothelium is likely to provide an efficient pathway that functionally links contractile pericytes and thereby,
serves to coordinate the vasomotor response of a retinal capillary.
Microcirculation (2006) 13, 353–363. doi:10.1080/10739680600745778
KEY WORDS: capillary, KATP channels, patch-clamp technique, pericytes, microvessels, retina
Traditionally, capillaries are considered to be the
component of the vasculature dedicated to the exchange of metabolites and waste products. On the
other hand, the regulation of blood flow is primarily
discussed in the context of the arterioles and arteries upstream to the capillary bed. While there is little
doubt that these larger vessels, encircled by vascular smooth muscle, serve to regulate the distribution
Grant support: The authors thank Bret A. Hughes and Daniel
G. Green for helpful comments. This project was supported by
grants EY12505 and EY07003 from the National Institutes of
Health. D.W. received a Physician-Scientist Training Award from
the American Diabetes Association and a Research to Prevent
Blindness Medical Student Research Fellowship. D.G.P. is a Research to Prevent Blindness Senior Scientific Scholar.
Address correspondence to Donald G. Puro, MD, PhD, Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, University of Michigan, 1000 Wall Street, Ann Arbor, MI 48105, USA. E-mail:
dgpuro@umich.edu
of blood flow through the body, there is growing evidence that microvessels, which are ensheathed by
contractile pericytes, also play a role in fine-tuning
local perfusion (9, 18, 21).
The changes in lumen diameter that alter vascular resistance in the larger vessels occur as the result of signal transduction pathways linking vasoactive stimuli
to effector mechanisms that may include changes in
the electrophysiology, the intracellular calcium concentration and the contractility of mural cells. Evidence is accumulating that such mechanisms also
exist in capillaries. For example, in previous studies
of the pericyte-containing microvasculature of the rat
retina, we identified vasoactive molecules that modulate ionic currents, intracellular calcium levels and
contractility of abluminal pericytes (9, 11, 23, 24).
Although identifying vasoactive signals and elucidating their effects on microvascular cells is important,
this information may provide only a partial insight
Electrotonic architecture of capillaries
354 DM Wu et al.
into the broader complexities of capillary physiology.
For example, because the cellular components of retinal microvessels are extensively coupled via gap junction pathways (10, 16), it seems likely that an electrical signal produced by local changes in ion channel
activity would spread through the microvascular
network and thereby affect many cells. However,
because much of the work on the microvasculature
of the retina has focused on individual components,
i.e., isolated/cultured pericytes or endothelial cells,
little is known about electrotonic transmission
within retinal capillaries. In fact, although studies
of capillaries located in non-CNS vascular beds
indicate that local changes in voltage spread through
the endothelium (3–5, 15, 25), there are no previous
studies of electrotonic transmission involving pericytes located on microvessels. These mural cells are
of particular interest in retinal vascular physiology
because they are especially plentiful in this vascular
bed and are likely to play a key role in the regulation
of local perfusion within this tissue (19).
In this study, simultaneous perforated-patch recordings of pairs of pericytes located in freshly isolated retinal microvessels allowed us to monitor
membrane potentials at different sites within a microvascular complex. Our principal aim was to begin to characterize the spread of hyperpolarization
within the pericyte-containing retinal microvasculature. The cell-to-cell transmission of hyperpolarization is of interest because the putative vasoactive
signals, adenosine (14) and dopamine (22), cause
the membrane potential of pericytes to increase secondary to the activation of KATP channels; associated
with this induced hyperpolarization, pericytes relax
and microvascular lumens widen (M. Minami and
D. G. Puro, unpublished observations).
Our recordings from pairs of pericytes revealed that
there is extensive cell-to-cell communication with
retinal microvessels. Based on our observations, we
propose a model of the electrotonic architecture of
the pericyte-containing retinal microvasculature. In
this model, transmission between a pericyte and an
endothelial cell is relatively inefficient, but the spread
of voltage through the microvascular endothelium is
extremely efficient.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Microvessel Isolation
Animal use conformed to the guidelines of the Association for Research in Vision and Ophthalmology
and the University of Michigan Committee on the Use
and Care of Animals. As detailed (23), 6- to 8-week
old Long-Evans rats (Charles River Laboratories,
Cambridge, MA) were killed with a rising concentration of carbon dioxide, and their retinas were rapidly
removed and incubated for 30 min at 30◦C in 2.5 ml
Earle’s balanced salt solution supplemented with 0.5
mM EDTA, 20 mM glucose, 15 U papain (Worthington Biochemicals, Freehold, NJ) and 2 mM cysteine;
to maintain pH and oxygenation, 95% oxygen-5%
carbon dioxide was bubbled into this solution. Subsequently, retinas were transferred to solution A, which
consisted of 140 mM NaCl, 3 mM KCl, 1.8 mM CaCl2,
0.8 mM MgCl2, 10 mM Na-Hepes, 15 mM mannitol,
and 5 mM glucose at pH 7.4 with osmolarity adjusted to 310 mosmol 1−1. Each retina was then gently sandwiched between two glass coverslips (15 mm
diameter, Warner Instrument Corp., Hamden, CT).
Retinal vessels adhered to the coverslip contacting
the vitreal side of the retina. Repetition of this tissue
print step resulted in several vessel-containing coverslips being obtained from each retina. Cell death, as
detected by trypan dye accumulation, was less than
10% in retinal microvessels isolated by this technique
(20). Photomicrographs of freshly isolated microvessels, as well as links to time-lapse videos showing
contractile responses of pericytes to vasoactive molecules, are in our previous publications (9, 11, 23).
Electrophysiology
Experiments were performed within 3 h of vessel
isolation. A coverslip containing microvessels was
placed in a recording chamber (volume = 1 ml),
which was perfused (∼1.5 ml min−1) with solution A,
which in some experiments was supplemented with
5 µM pinacidil without or with 1 mM octanol. Vessels were examined at X400 magnification with an
inverted microscope equipped with phase-contrast
optics; the diameter of the microscopic field was
∼800 µm. Dual perforated-patch clamp recordings
were made in pericytes separated by 90 to 610 µm on
freshly isolated microvessels. The recording pipette
solution consisted of 50 mM KCl, 64 mM K2SO4,
6 mM MgCl2, 10 mM K-Hepes, 240 µg ml−1 amphotericin B, and 240µg ml−1 nystatin at pH 7.4 with the
osmolarity adjusted to 280 mosmol l−1. The recording pipettes, which had resistances of ∼5 M, were
mounted in the holder of a patch-clamp amplifier
(Axopatch 200B,Axon Instruments, Union City, CA);
seals of ≥ 10 G were made to the cell bodies of pericytes, which were identified by their characteristic
“bump on a log’’ appearance on the abluminal walls
 15498719, 2006, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1080/10739680600745778 by University Of Maryland, Wiley Online Library on [21/02/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Electrotonic architecture of capillaries
DM Wu et al. 355
of microvessels (12, 17). After amphotericin/nystatin
perforated the patch of membrane at the tip of the
pipette, voltage was recorded under current-clamped
conditions or currents were monitored under voltageclamp conditions. Voltage and currents were filtered
at 1 kHz with a four-pole Bessel filter, digitally sampled at 20 kHz using a DigiData 1200B acquisition
system (Axon Instruments) and stored by a computer
equipped with pClamp 8 (Axon Instruments). We
used only recordings in which the access resistance
(Ra) was < 25 M, which is less than ∼7% of the
membrane resistance (Rm) measured in perforatedpatch recordings of pericytes located on freshly isolated retinal microvessels (10); having a low Ra/Rm
ratio minimized errors in measuring a cell’s membrane potential during the injection of current via
its recording pipette. The Ra of each recording was
monitored throughout our dual perforated-patch experiments; an increase in this resistance led to the
termination of recording. Adjustment for the calculated liquid junction potential (2), which was −8 mV,
was made after data collection.
One method to assess transmission of hyperpolarization during dual patch-clamp recordings was to inject a hyperpolarizing current into one of a pair of
sampled pericytes while the membrane potential was
monitored at both recording sites. More specifically,
under the control of pClamp software, current steps
of 750 ms duration and −30 pA amplitude were administered at3s intervals for 1 min via the recording
pipette of one of the sampled pericytes. The maximal
voltage changes in the pericyte at the site of current
injection and the pericyte at the distant recording site
were recorded. As an indicator of transmission efficiency, we then calculated the ratio of the voltage
change at the distant pericyte to the stimulated pericyte (Vd/Vs). Because calcium-activated chloride channels cause transient depolarizations in pericytes that are located on retinal microvessels (17),
only traces lacking these spontaneous depolarizations were used to calculate Vd/Vs. During each
experiment, current steps were applied to each of
the sampled pericytes; we found that the direction
of transmission did not significantly (P = 0.1) affect Vd/Vs, as long as the Ra of each recording was <25 M. In some experiments, a miniperfusion pipette containing solution A supplemented
with 1 mM heptanol was used to focally apply this
gap junction uncoupler at sites along an isolated microvessel in which dual perforated-patch recordings
were being made. Indicative that conduction through
the bathing solution was insufficient to account for
the communication reported here, pipette-to-pipette
transmission was not detected in instances in which
one of the two recording seals was spontaneously lost
or when one pipette was lifted above the microvessel,
but remained within the bathing solution.
Another method to assess transmission of hyperpolarization within a retinal microvessel was to monitor the membrane potentials of two sampled pericytes while the KATP channel activator pinacidil was
miniperfused. For these experiments, pipettes identical in shape to the recording pipettes were filled
with solution A supplemented with 1 mM pinacidil.
A miniperfusion pipette was mounted on a micromanipulator (Narishige Scientific Instrument Ltd.,
Tokyo, Japan) and its back end connected to a pneumatic injection system (Neuro Phore PPS-2, Medical Systems Corp., Great Neck, NY); hyperpolarizing
responses were almost always induced without applying pressure, although on rare occasions ≤ 3 psi
was used when the tip of a pipette was partially obstructed. Over the course of an experiment, pinacidil
was focally applied at microvascular sites adjacent
to each of the recording pipettes. Before, during, and
after focal application of pinacidil, the membrane potentials of the two sampled pericytes were monitored
in current-clamp recordings or determined from the
zero-current potential of voltage-clamp recordings.
A change in membrane potential was detected in the
pericyte located in the area of pinacidil application
as well as in the pericyte at the distant recording site.
As with our current injection experiments, we quantified Vd/Vs as a numerical indicator of transmission efficiency. In experiments involving the focal
application of pinacidil, Vd/Vs was the ratio of
the change in voltage detected in the pericyte at the
distant recording site to the change in voltage simultaneously detected at the pericyte that was directly
exposed to pinacidil. For these calculations, we used
voltages at times when there were no spontaneous
transient depolarizations.
For each pair of sampled pericytes, current-voltage
(I–V) relations were determined by using pClampcontrolled protocols in which the holding potential
of the pericytes was clamped at −58 mV. Although
the principal aim of this study was to characterize
the spread of hyperpolarization by monitoring the
voltages of pairs of current-clamped pericytes, our
voltage-clamp recordings also permitted a calculation of Vd/Vs. In the dual voltage-clamp recordings, Vs was defined as the voltage administered
via one of the recording pipettes; in this study, we determined the Vd/Vs ratio for voltage steps from
 15498719, 2006, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1080/10739680600745778 by University Of Maryland, Wiley Online Library on [21/02/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Electrotonic architecture of capillaries
356 DM Wu et al.
−58 mV to −78 mV and −58 mV to −38 mV. To calculate Vd, which was defined as the voltage change
that was prevented in the distantly located voltageclamped pericyte, we determined the amplitude of
the current applied in order to maintain the distant
pericyte’s voltage at −58 mV while a 20 mV voltage step was administered to the stimulated pericyte.
From the current-voltage plot generated for the distant pericyte, we then determined the amplitude of
the voltage change that had been prevented in the
distant pericyte by the current applied via its voltageclamp amplifier. Indicative of the validity of this indirect method of determining Vd/Vs, we report
in the Results section that the Vd/Vs ratio calculated from our voltage-clamp recordings did not differ significantly (P = 0.6) from the Vd/Vs ratio
observed during our current-clamp experiments. In
a similar fashion, we calculated Vd and Vs from
a pair of voltage-clamped pericytes that were monitored as solution A supplemented with 1 mM oxotremorine was locally perfused near one of the sampled pair of pericytes. The amplitude of the currents
recorded in both sampled pericytes was quantified as
detailed previously (17, 23). Subsequently, the I–V
plot for the pericyte miniperfused with oxotremorine
and the amplitude of the oxotremorine-induced current in this cell permitted a determination of the Vs
that would be generated by the induced current; similarly, the current change and the I–V relations for the
distant pericyte allowed calculation of Vd.
Statistics
Data are given as means ± SEM. Probability was
evaluated by the Student’s t-test, paired or unpaired
as appropriate. A graphics software package (Origin
7, Microcal, Northampton, MA, USA) was used to determine whether or not the distribution of Vd/Vs
ratios versus inter-pipette distance could be adequately fit by a single exponential function.
Time-Lapse Photography
As demonstrated previously (9, 11), detection of contracting or relaxing pericytes is much more obvious
and reliable when one views a time-lapse movie of
a microvessel rather than depending upon on-line
observations or still photographs. In our time-lapse
experiments, we positioned a microvessel-containing
coverslip in a perfusion chamber (volume = 200 µl)
on the stage of a Nikon Eclipse E800 microscope
equipped with differential interference contrast optics, which permitted X1000 magnification with the
aid of a X100 oil objective. As detailed (9), images were recorded at 8 s intervals using a Nikon
DCM1200 digital camera and ImagePro Plus software (Version 4.5, Media Cybernetics, Silver Spring
MD). As in our previous studies, visual inspection of
the time-lapse movies was used to detect pericyte relaxation or contraction during exposure of microvessels to pinacidil. ImagePro software was used to measure the diameters of microvascular lumens at sites
in which a relaxing pericyte and the adjacent lumen
were simultaneously visible in the time-lapse photographs.
Chemicals
Unless otherwise noted, chemicals were obtained
from Sigma (St. Louis, MO).
RESULTS
Transmission of Voltage Changes Within
Pericyte-Containing Microvessels
To begin to characterize electrotonic transmission
within the pericyte-containing microvasculature of
the retina, we monitored the membrane potentials
of pairs of pericytes located on retinal microvessels
freshly isolated from the adult rat. A sketch of one
of the microvascular complexes in which dual patch
clamp recordings were made is shown in Figure 1A. In
a series of 24 microvessels in which pairs of currentclamped pericytes were separated by 298 ± 26 µm,
we observed that the membrane potentials of both of
the monitored pericytes had strikingly similar spontaneous fluctuations. Figure 1B shows an example
of the congruity of transient depolarizations, which
are known to be generated by calcium-activated chloride channels (17). The synchronicity of spontaneous
voltage changes suggested that electrotonic transmission along a pericyte-containing microvessel is
efficient.
To more directly assess electrotonic transmission
of hyperpolarization, we performed experiments in
which 750 ms steps of −30 pA were administered
via a recording pipette into one of two sampled pericytes located on an isolated microvessel (Figure 1C).
The spread of hyperpolarization was of interest because we earlier reported that adenosine (14) and
dopamine (22) cause the membrane potential of pericytes to increase secondary to KATP channel activation, which induces pericytes to relax and microvascular lumens to widen (M. Minami and D. G. Puro,
unpublished observations). In this study, we found
 15498719, 2006, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1080/10739680600745778 by University Of Maryland, Wiley Online Library on [21/02/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Electrotonic architecture of capillaries
DM Wu et al. 357
Figure 1. Dual perforated-patch recordings from a pericyte-containing microvessel freshly isolated from an adult rat
retina. (A), sketch of an isolated microvascular complex in which dual perforated-patch recordings were made. The
numbers 1 and 2 show the sites of perforated-patch pipettes used to monitor the membrane potentials of a pair of
pericytes. Arrowheads indicate the sites of focal application of pinacidil. The blue circle (diameter = ∼800 µm) shows
the portion of the microvessel that was in view during the experiment. The arrow indicates the direction of flow of the
perfusate. (B) Continuous recordings of the membrane potentials of two pericytes that were on the microvessel shown
in (A). The spontaneous transient depolarizations, which are due to the activity of calcium-activated chloride channels
(17), had strikingly similar frequencies and amplitudes in the two pericyte recordings. (C) Voltage traces recorded in
same pericytes before, during and after application via recording pipette 1 of a −30-pA step in current; pericyte 2
remained current-clamped at 0 pA. Each trace is the average of 5 sweeps. (D) Continuous voltage recordings during the
miniperfusion of pinacidil. Note the different time scales for the voltage traces shown in panels C and D. The location
of the pinacidil-filled pipette during the recordings can be determined by matching the colored arrowheads in panel A.
Interestingly, suggestive of a heterogenous distribution of pinacidil-activated KATP channels, the most proximal portion
of this isolated microvessel exhibited markedly less sensitivity to pinacidil. In 7 other dual recordings made during focal
pinacidil application at various sites along a pericyte-containing microvessel, there also were marked differences in the
sensitivity to this KATP channel activator.
that in each of two-dozen microvessels monitored by
dual recordings, hyperpolarization was detected not
only in the current-injected cell, but also in the distant
monitored pericyte (Figure 2). These dual recording experiments allowed us to assess the possibility
that the spread of hyperpolarization along a pericytecontaining microvessel is a first-order process. This
was of interest because analyses of smooth muscleencircled arterioles have suggested that transmission
through the walls of these vessels may have features
in common with electrotonic transmission through
an ideal cable (6). If a vessel was similar to an infinite cable, then modeling predicts an exponential
decay in the conducted voltage change as the distance between the stimulation site and the distant
recording site is increased. However, as shown in Figure 2, we found that when current was injected into
one of two sampled pericytes, there was little correlation (R = 0.02) between the inter-pipette distance
and Vd/Vs, which is the ratio of the change in
membrane potential at the distant site to the change
in membrane potential at the stimulation site. Not
only did the observed Vd/Vs ratio change little
between the sampled inter-pipette distances of 90 to
610 µm, but extrapolation to an inter-pipette distance of zero yielded a Vd/Vs ratio of ∼0.6, rather
than the expected value at this hypothetical point of
1.0 (Figure 2, inset). Thus, we concluded that a firstorder process does not adequately describe the spread
through a microvessel of a hyperpolarization generated in a pericyte.
In addition to quantifying transmission of hyperpolarizations induced by the injection of current, we also
assessed the spread of the voltage change induced by
the miniperfusion of pinacidil (Figure 1D), which activates microvascular KATP channels (14) and, as detected in our time-lapse movies, caused pericytes to
relax and the lumens adjacent to the relaxing pericytes to dilate from 3.1 ± 0.4 µm to 4.8 ± 0.5 µm
(n = 4, P = 0.002). We used this pinacidil method to
induce a hyperpolarization because, in contrast to the
current-injection procedure, most of the induced current detected in a pericyte during pinacidil exposure
 15498719, 2006, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1080/10739680600745778 by University Of Maryland, Wiley Online Library on [21/02/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Electrotonic architecture of capillaries
358 DM Wu et al.
Figure 2. Spread of hyperpolarization within retinal microvessels. Plot of Vd/Vs versus the distance between
recording sites for 24 pairs of pericytes; Vd/Vs is the
ratio of the change in membrane potential at the distant
site to the change in membrane potential at the stimulation site. Each circle shows the Vd/Vs for a hyperpolarization generated by administering a −30-pA step of
current via the recording pipette of one of two sampled
pericytes located on a freshly isolated retinal microvessel.
Squares show the Vd/Vs ratio for hyperpolarizations
generated when pinacidil was focally applied near one of
the two sampled pericytes. The inset shows the averages
of the Vd/Vs ratios for the current-injection experiments; data were grouped into interpipette distances of 90–
179 µm, 180–279 µm, 280–379 µm, and 380–479 µm.
appears to be generated by neighboring microvascular cells, rather than by the sampled pericyte. Consistent with pinacidil activating KATP channels located
predominately in the microvascular neighbors of a
sampled pericyte, the conductance of the current induced in a pericyte during exposure to 5 µM pinacidil
decreased from 1150 ± 290 pS to 40 ± 60 pS (n
= 3, P < 0.001) when the pinacidil-containing perfusate was supplemented with octanol (1 mM), which
is one of a series of alcohols that uncouple gap junctions. Because the conductance of a KATP channel
is ∼40 pS (8), this observation suggests that there
is only a single KATP channel activated in a sampled pericyte by pinacidil. Thus, we conclude that
when gap junctions are open, more than 95% of the
pinacidil-induced current detected in a sampled pericyte is generated elsewhere, most likely by neighboring endothelial cells, which are known to have sizable
KATP currents (1, 13), and to some degree by nearby
pericytes even though our experiments indicate that
each of these mural cells express a minimal number
of pinacidil-activated KATP channels.
In a series of eight dual recordings made during the
focal application of pinacidil, we observed that the
Vd/Vs ratio was 0.91 ± 0.02 at a mean interpericyte distance of 356 ± 51 µm (squares in Figure 2). This Vd/Vs ratio for pinacidil-induced
hyperpolarizations was significantly (P < 0.001)
greater than the Vd/Vs of 0.61 ± 0.05 observed
in the same eight vessels when hyperpolarization was
instigated by the injection of current into one of the
two sampled pericytes.
To help assess the possibility that the transmission
of hyperpolarizatin within retinal capillaries is dependent upon gap junctions, we monitored pairs of
pericytes as heptanol, which uncouples gap junctions, was locally perfused (Figure 3). Suggestive of
the importance of gap junctions, heptanol significantly (P = 0.012) diminished the transmission of
induced changes in voltage or current. Specifically,
in a series of four dual recording experiments, we
observed that the application of heptanol near one
of the two recording sites decreased the efficacy of
transmission from 0.52 ± 0.08 to 0.06 ± 0.03 at
a mean inter-pipette distance of 271 ± 41 µm; the
resting membrane potential of the pericytes studied in this series of experiments was −42 ± 1 mV.
In each case, this effect of heptanol on intercellular
transmission was reversed promptly and fully. These
findings with heptanol are consistent with our previous observations that the closure of microvascular
gap junctions by benzoylbenzoyl-ATP profoundly reduces electrotonic communication between pericytes
(11). Taken together, our experiments support the
idea that gap junction pathways play a key role in
establishing the electrotonic architecture of retinal
capillaries.
Although the principal aim of this study was to begin
to characterize the transmission of hyperpolarization,
the voltage-clamp recordings, which we obtained
from the same 24 pericyte pairs whose transmission
of hyperpolarization was assessed under currentclamp conditions (Figure 2), permitted us to also
estimate the transmission efficacy of depolarizations
(see Materials and Methods for details). Indicative
of the validity of using voltage-clamp recordings
to assess transmission, this method when used to
assess transmission of a 20 mV hyperpolarizing
step administered to a pericyte yielded a calculated
Vd/Vs ratio of 0.56 ± 0.04 (n = 24), which
was not significantly (P = 0.6) different than the
Vd/Vs ratio of 0.59 ± 0.03 that was observed
when transmission of hyperpolarization was studied
in the same 24 pericyte pairs under current-clamp
 15498719, 2006, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1080/10739680600745778 by University Of Maryland, Wiley Online Library on [21/02/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Electrotonic architecture of capillaries
DM Wu et al. 359
Figure 3. Effect of heptanol on electrotonic transmission between two pericytes separated by approximately 300 µm
along a freshly isolated retinal microvessel. Voltage traces of the sampled pericytes under control conditions (top) and
during miniperfusion of heptanol at microvascular site located near one of the sampled pericytes. Due to the marked
increase in the membrane resistance of the uncoupled pericyte, the injection of a 30-pA current generated a larger
hyperpolarization in the presence of the gap junction uncoupler than under control conditions. Each trace is the average
of 7 sweeps; note that the voltage scales are different for the traces obtained under control conditions and during exposure
to heptanol. The protocol for the injection of current via one of the recording pipettes is shown below the appropriate
voltage traces.
conditions. With regard to a depolarizing stimulus,
a Vd/Vs ratio of 0.55 ± 0.05 was calculated
from the 24 pairs voltage-clamp recordings obtained
during the administration of a 20 mV depolarization
to one of two simultaneously monitored cells; this
ratio was not significantly (P > 0.5) different than
the Vd/Vs ratios determined for the spread of
hyperpolarization from a pericyte injected with a
step of current or voltage. In another a series of
dual voltage-clamp recordings, we assessed electrotonic transmission during the focal application of
oxotremorine, which is a muscarinic agonist that
selectively activates depolarizing calcium-activated
chloride currents in retinal microvascular cells (17).
In these experiments, the calculated Vd/Vs ratio
was 0.98 ± 0.02 (n = 3) at an inter-pipette distance
of 360 ± 87 µm; the mean resting membrane
potential was −41 ± 1 mV. This Vd/Vs ratio for
the spread of oxotremorine-induced depolarizations
was not significantly (P = 0.08) different than
that observed for hyperpolarizations induced by the
miniperfusion of pinacidil (Figure 2). Taken together,
our dual recording experiments suggest that depolarizations and hyperpolarizations spread through
retinal microvessels with similar transmission
efficacies.
Discussion
To better understand the functional organization
of the pericyte-containing microvasculature of the
retina, we quantified electrotonic transmission between pairs of pericytes located on the abluminal wall
of freshly isolated rat retinal microvessels. Indicative
of efficient cell-to-cell communication, perforatedpatch recordings revealed a striking similarity in the
spontaneous depolarizations of the membrane potentials of pairs of widely separated pericytes. Direct evidence of electrotonic transmission was that in each
of 24 dual recordings, a hyperpolarizing current administered via one of the perforated-patch pipettes
elicited a voltage change, not only in the currentinjected cell, but also in the distant sampled pericyte.
Consistent with the importance of gap junction pathways, the gap junction uncoupler heptanol markedly
diminished this electrotonic transmission.
We initially hypothesized that the spread of hyperpolarization from a pericyte to locations along a
microvessel is a first-order process. However, our
experimental findings did not support this idea. Inconsistent with voltage decaying exponentially as it
spreads from a current-injected pericyte, the distance between sampled pericytes had little effect on
 15498719, 2006, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1080/10739680600745778 by University Of Maryland, Wiley Online Library on [21/02/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Electrotonic architecture of capillaries
360 DM Wu et al.
Vd/Vs, which is the ratio of the voltage change
of the distant pericyte to the voltage change of the
stimulated pericyte. One possible explanation for
Vd/Vs being minimally affected by inter-pipette
distance is that electrotonic transmission is highly efficient. However, this possibility could not account for
Vd/Vs decreasing from an initial value of 1.0 at
the hypothetical inter-pipette distance of zero to the
observed ratio of ∼0.6 at the inter-pipette distance of
only 90 µm, which was the shortest interval sampled
in our study. Interestingly, although the hyperpolarization spreading from a current-injected pericyte appears to decrease by approximately 40% within ∼100
µm, we found that the Vd/Vs ratio decreased by
less than 10% over a distance of 350 µm when voltage changes were induced by pinacidil whose activation of KATP channels causes hyperpolarization in
retinal microvessels (14) and, as shown here, pericyte
relaxation and vasodilation.
Our experimental results raise the question of what
accounts for the differing rates of decay for hyperpolarizations caused by the injection of current versus those induced by the application of pinacidil. We
postulate that a critical reason for the differing decay rates is that the intercellular pathway for the
spread of a hyperpolarization induced by currentinjection is different than the pathway for the spread
of a pinacidil-induced hyperpolarization (Figure 4A
and B). In the case of a current-injected pericyte, we
propose that voltage spreads chiefly along the following pathway: initially, from the hyperpolarized
pericyte to the underlying endothelium, then horizontally through a series of endothelial cells, and
finally from the endothelium into the distant pericyte. Although our model does not exclude direct
pericyte-to-pericyte transmission, it seems unlikely
that this homocellular pathway could account for the
Vd/Vs ratio abruptly decreasing from 1.0 to the
observed value of ∼0.6 at an inter-pipette distance of
90 µm and then subsequently changing minimally as
the inter-pipette distance increased. In contrast to a
current step directly hyperpolarizing a pericyte, the
model illustrated in Figure 4B indicates that the application of pinacidil indirectly causes pericyte hyperpolarization. Support for this scenario is our finding
that gap junction uncoupling reduced the pinacidilinduced current in pericytes by >95%. Thus, it is
likely that most of the KATP channels activated by
pinacidil are located not in a sampled pericyte, but
in its neighbors. An important consequence of this
is that both of the monitored pericytes are recipients
of a pinacidil-induced hyperpolarization (Figure 4B).
Figure 4. Model of electrotonic transmission during dual
perforated-patch recordings from pericytes located on a
retinal microvessel. (A) Arrows show the putative pathway for the spread of hyperpolarization that is generated
by administering a step of current via a perforated-patch
pipette sealed to a pericyte (labeled “s’’). For illustrative
purposes, red denotes the origin of a current-induced hyperpolarization, i.e., the pericyte to which pipette “s’’ is
sealed. The recording pipette labeled “d’’ is the distant
monitored pericyte. In this model, the inter-pipette distance is 350 µm. For illustrative purposes, only the sampled pericytes are shown even though we estimate that
there are ∼15 pericytes located on a 350-µm microvascular segment. (B) Arrows show the putative pathways
for the spread of hyperpolarization generated by the focal application of pinacidil (shown in green) Red denotes
the predominant site of origin for the hyperpolarization
instigated by the focal application of pinacidil. (C) Putative efficacies of transmission at pericyte/endothelial junctions and through 350 µm of the endothelium. As discussed in the text, the Vd/Vs observed during pinacidil
application, i.e., 0.91, reflects the efficacy of transmission through 350 µm of the endothelium. To calculate
the fraction of voltage transmitted between a pericyte
and an endothelial cell, we assumed that the efficacy of
transmission across these heterocellular junctions was the
same in both directions. Thus, for voltage changes induced by the injection of current via a perforated-patch
pipette, we used the formula Vd = Vs× (transmission efficacy at these heterocellular junctions)2× 0.91.
Consequently, with 0.61 being the Vd/Vs ratio observed during current injection, the calculated efficacy of
transmission between a pericyte and an endothelial cell is
0.82.
 15498719, 2006, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1080/10739680600745778 by University Of Maryland, Wiley Online Library on [21/02/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Electrotonic architecture of capillaries
DM Wu et al. 361
As a result, the voltage loss associated with endothelial/pericyte transmission diminishes both Vs and
Vd by similar proportions; thus, the effects of this
heterocellular transmission on the Vd/Vs ratio are
neutralized. Based on these considerations, it appears
likely that the observed Vd/Vs ratio for pinacidilinduced hyperpolarizations is an indicator of the efficacy of transmission through the vascular endothelium. In our experiments, this efficacy was 0.91 for
an inter-pipette distance of ∼350 µm. With there being an estimated 15 endothelial cells in a 350 µm
microvascular segment (D Wu and D Puro, unpublished observations), it appears that there is only approximately a 0.5% loss of a voltage during transmission between two endothelial cells. Thus, our dual
recordings indicate that transmission through the endothelium is highly efficient. Although low resistance
gap junction pathway could fully account for efficient
endothelial transmission, our experiments do not exclude that the conduction is enhanced by active membrane processes, as appear to occur in cheek pouch
arterioles (7). Despite the fact that mechanistic details of endothelial cell-to-endothelial cell transmission remain to be elucidated, our observations suggest
that the endothelium provides an efficient pathway
to functionally link contractile pericytes and thereby,
to effectively coordinate the vasomotor response of a
retinal capillary.
An additional issue concerns the efficacy of transmission between a pericyte and an endothelial cell.
Even though we did not directly record from endothelial cells, our dual pericyte recordings permit
an estimation of the efficacy of pericyte/endothelial
transmission. Key to this determination is that the
Vs induced by the injection of current is not affected by subsequent intercellular transmission while
the observed Vd is dependent upon (1) the efficacy of transmission between the stimulated pericyte and the underlying endothelium, (2) the efficacy of transmission through the endothelium and (3)
the efficacy of transmission between the endothelium
and the distant sampled pericyte (Figure 4A). Assuming that the efficacy of transmission at pericyte/
endothelial junctions is the same in both directions,
our experimental observations permit an estimation
of transmission efficacy at these heterocellular junctions. Specifically, with 0.61 being the observed
Vd/Vs for a current-induced hyperpolarization
at an inter-pipette distance of ∼350 µm and, as
discussed above, with the efficacy of transmission
through 350 µm of the endothelium being 0.91, the
calculated efficacy of transmission between a pericyte
and an endothelial cell is 0.82 (see Figure 4C for additional details). This calculated value indicates that
there is nearly a 20% loss of voltage during transmission between a pericyte and an endothelial cell.
This contrasts sharply with the estimated 0.995 efficacy of electrotonic transmission between endothelial
cells. These differences in transmission efficiency are
likely to account for our observation that the spread
of a voltage change generated by a pericyte is not a
first-order process.
This analysis of electrotonic transmission within
pericyte-containing retinal microvessels is based on
observations of freshly isolated vessels. One experimental advantage of studying isolated capillaries is
that the patch-clamp technique can be used to inject
current directly into a pericyte and to precisely monitor the membrane potentials of these mural cells. At
present, this electrophysiological technique has not
been successfully applied to the analysis of capillaries
in situ. An additional advantage of isolated microvessels is the ability to study the actions of ion channel activators and other vasoactive chemicals without
confounding effects mediated by non-vascular cells.
However, despite advantages, caution must be exercised when making conclusions based on the study
of isolated retinal vessels. For example, although details of our model of electrotonic transmission could
be further tested by direct recordings from microvascular endothelial cells, this is challenging because the
density of pericytes in retinal microvessels is the highest of any vascular bed and consequently much of the
endothelial surface is covered by processes of these
mural cells (19). As a result, the patch-clamping
of endothelial cells appears to require pericyte disruption, which could alter the functional organization of a microvessel. Another caution concerning
our study is that our isolated microvessels were not
internally perfused. As a consequence, possible effects of blood flow on gap junction function remain
unknown.
Because the principal aim of this study was to
analyze the transmission of hyperpolarization, additional experimental study is required to further
characterize the spread of depolarization within the
pericyte-containing microvasculature. However, our
observation that there is a striking synchronicity
of the spontaneously occurring depolarizations in
widely separated pericytes support the possibility
that the transmission of depolarizing stimuli, as well
as hyperpolarizations, is highly efficient within these
microvessels. In addition, our dual voltage-clamp
recordings that were obtained while a depolarizating
 15498719, 2006, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1080/10739680600745778 by University Of Maryland, Wiley Online Library on [21/02/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Electrotonic architecture of capillaries
362 DM Wu et al.
voltage was applied to a sampled pericyte or while a
depolarizing current was induced by the focal application of oxotremorine suggest that depolarizations are transmitted through the retinal microvasculature in manner that is similar to the spread of
hyperpolarizations.
In summary, our dual perforated-patch recordings
indicate that under the conditions used in this study,
voltage spreads widely through the capillary endothelium of retinal microvessels, but is attenuated by approximately 20% during pericyte/endothelial transmission. Based on these experimental findings, we
propose a model of the retinal microvasculature in
which the endothelium provides an efficient pathway to functionally link the contractile pericytes and
thereby, to effectively coordinate a capillary’s vasomotor response. However, because vasoactive signals,
such as ATP, angiotensin II and endothelin-1, profoundly affect the function of gap junction pathways
within pericyte-containing retinal microvessels (9–
11), we suspect that future studies will reveal that
the electrotonic architecture of this microvasculature
is dynamic, not static.
REFERENCES
1. Adams DJ, Hill MA. (2004). Potassium channels and
membrane potential in the modulation of intracellular calcium in vascular endothelial cells. J Cardiovasc
Electrophysiol 15:598–610.
2. Barry PH. (1994). JPCalc, a software package for calculating liquid junction potential corrections in patchclamp, intracellular, epithelial and bilayer measurements and for correcting junction potential measurements. J Neurosci Methods 51:107–116.
3. Beach JM, McGahren ED, Duling BR. (1998). Capillaries and arterioles are electrically coupled in hamster
cheek pouch. Am J Physiol 275:H1489–H1496.
4. Berg BR, Cohen KD, Sarelius IH. (1997). Direct coupling between blood flow and metabolism at the capillary level in striated muscle. Am J Physiol 272:H2693–
H2700.
5. Cohen KD, Berg BR, Sarelius IH. (2000). Remote arteriolar dilations in response to muscle contraction
under capillaries. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol
278:H1916–H1923.
6. Crane GJ, Neild TO. (1999). An equation describing spread of membrane potential changes in a short
segment of blood vessel. Phys Med Biol 44:N217–
N221.
7. Crane GJ, Neild TO, Segal SS. (2004). Contribution
of active membrane processes to conducted hyperpolarization in arterioles of hamster cheek pouch. Microcirculation 11:425–433.
8. Ho K, Nichols CG, Lederer WJ, Lytton J, Vassilev
PM, Kanazirska MV, Hebert SC. (1993). Cloning and
expression of an inwardly rectifying ATP-regulated
potassium channel. Nature 362:31–38.
9. Kawamura H, Kobayashi M, Li Q, Yamanishi S,
Katsumura K, Minami M, Wu DM, Puro DG. (2004).
Effects of angiotensin II on the pericyte-containing microvasculature of the rat retina. J Physiol 561:671–
683.
10. Kawamura H, Oku H, Li Q, Sakagami K, Puro DG.
(2002). Endothelin-induced changes in the physiology
of retinal pericytes. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 43:882–
888.
11. Kawamura H, Sugiyama T, Wu DM, Kobayashi M,
Yamanishi S, Katsumura K, Puro DG. (2003). ATP:
a vasoactive signal in the pericyte-containing microvasculature of the rat retina. J Physiol 551:787–
799.
12. Kuwabara T, Cogan DG. (1960). Studies of retinal
vascular patterns. 1: normal architecture. Arch Ophthalmol 64:904–911.
13. Langheinrich U, Daut J. (1997). Hyperpolarization of
isolated capillaries from guinea-pig heart induced by
K+ channel openers and glucose deprivation. J Physiol
502:397–408.
14. Li Q, Puro DG. (2001). Adenosine activates ATPsensitive K+ currents in pericytes of rat retinal microvessels: role of A1 and A2a receptors. Brain Res
907:93–99.
15. McGahren ED, Beach JM, Duling BR. (1998). Capillaries demonstrate changes in membrane potential
in response to pharmacological stimuli. Am J Physiol
274:H60–H65.
16. Oku H, Kodama T, Sakagami K, Puro DG. (2001).
Diabetes-induced disruption of gap junction pathways
within the retinal microvasculature. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 42:1915–1920.
17. Sakagami K, Wu DM, Puro DG. (1999). Physiology
of rat retinal pericytes: modulation of ion channel activity by serum-derived molecules. J Physiol 521:637–
650.
18. Schonfelder U, Hofer A, Paul M, Funk RH. (1998).
In situ observation of living pericytes in rat retinal
capillaries. Microvasc Res 56:22–29.
19. Shepro D, Morel NM. (1993). Pericyte physiology.
FASEB J 7:1031–1038.
20. Sugiyama T, Kobayashi M, Kawamura H, Li Q, Puro
DG. (2004). Enhancement of P2X7 induced pore formation and apoptosis: an early effect of diabetes on
the retinal microvasculature. Invest Ophthalmol Vis
Sci 45:1026–1032.
21. Tilton RG. (1991). Capillary pericytes: perspectives
and future trends. J Electron Microsc Tech 19:327–
344.
22. Wu DM, Kawamura H, Li Q, Puro DG. (2001).
Dopamine activates ATP-sensitive K+ currents in rat
retinal pericytes. Vis Neurosci 18:935–940.
 15498719, 2006, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1080/10739680600745778 by University Of Maryland, Wiley Online Library on [21/02/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Electrotonic architecture of capillaries
DM Wu et al. 363
23. Wu DM, Kawamura H, Sakagami K, Kobayashi M,
Puro DG. (2003). Cholinergic regulation of pericytecontaining retinal microvessels. Am J Physiol Heart
Circ Physiol. 284:H2083–H2090.
24. Yamanishi S, Katsumura K, Kobayashi T, Puro DG.
(2006). Extracellular lactate as a dynamic vasoactive
signal in the rat retinal microvasculature. Am J Physiol
Heart Circ Physiol. 290:H925–H934.
25. Yu J, Bihari A, Lidington D, and Tyml K. (2000).
Gap junction uncouplers attenuate arteriolar response
to distal capillary stimuli. Microvasc Res 59:162–
168.
 15498719, 2006, 5, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1080/10739680600745778 by University Of Maryland, Wiley Online Library on [21/02/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
 
 
 The capillary Kir channel as sensor and amplifier of
neuronal signals: Modeling insights on K+
-mediated
neurovascular communication
Arash Moshkforousha
, Baarbod Ashenagara
, Osama F. Harrazb
, Fabrice Dabertrandb,c,d, Thomas A. Longdenb,e,
Mark T. Nelsonb,f, and Nikolaos M. Tsoukiasa,g,1
a
Department of Biomedical Engineering, Florida International University, Miami, FL 33199; b
Department of Pharmacology, College of Medicine, University
of Vermont, Burlington, VT 05405; c
Department of Anesthesiology, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO 80045; d
Department of
Pharmacology, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO 80045; e
Department of Physiology, University of Maryland School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD 21201; f
Division of Cardiovascular Sciences, University of Manchester, Manchester M13 9PL, United Kingdom; and g
School of Chemical
Engineering, National Technical University of Athens, Zografou 157 72, Greece
Edited by Arthur Karlin, Vagelos College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University, New York, NY, and approved May 20, 2020 (received for review
January 9, 2020)
Neuronal activity leads to an increase in local cerebral blood flow
(CBF) to allow adequate supply of oxygen and nutrients to active
neurons, a process termed neurovascular coupling (NVC). We have
previously shown that capillary endothelial cell (cEC) inwardly
rectifying K+ (Kir) channels can sense neuronally evoked increases
in interstitial K+ and induce rapid and robust dilations of upstream
parenchymal arterioles, suggesting a key role of cECs in NVC. The
requirements of this signal conduction remain elusive. Here, we
utilize mathematical modeling to investigate how small outward
currents in stimulated cECs can elicit physiologically relevant
spread of vasodilatory signals within the highly interconnected
brain microvascular network to increase local CBF. Our model
shows that the Kir channel can act as an “on–off” switch in cECs
to hyperpolarize the cell membrane as extracellular K+ increases. A
local hyperpolarization can be amplified by the voltage-dependent
activation of Kir in neighboring cECs. Sufficient Kir density enables
robust amplification of the hyperpolarizing stimulus and produces
responses that resemble action potentials in excitable cells. This
Kir-mediated excitability can remain localized in the stimulated
region or regeneratively propagate over significant distances in
the microvascular network, thus dramatically increasing the efficacy of K+ for eliciting local hyperemia. Modeling results show
how changes in cEC transmembrane current densities and gap
junctional resistances can affect K+
-mediated NVC and suggest a
key role for Kir as a sensor of neuronal activity and an amplifier of
retrograde electrical signaling in the cerebral vasculature.
cerebral blood flow | electrical conduction | neurovascular unit | inwardrectifying potassium | computational modeling
Neuronal activity leads to a rapid increase in local cerebral
blood flow (CBF) by dilating penetrating (parenchymal)
arterioles (PAs) and surface (pial) arteries. The process which
underlies this functional hyperemia is referred to as neurovascular coupling (NVC) and allows blood supply to respond to
the metabolic demands in the brain (1). NVC is essential for
normal brain function and is disrupted in several cognitive disorders and stroke (2). Functional hyperemia also constitutes the
physiological basis for functional neuroimaging techniques that
are widely used to probe brain function (3).
Despite significant research efforts, how neuronal activity is
sensed by the vasculature is far from being fully understood and
the communicating cells and chemical messengers involved are
still under debate. It is now recognized that NVC mechanisms
involve a variety of mediators including nitric oxide, arachidonic
acid metabolites, and K+ ions that are released from neurons or
glial cells (4–9). An emerging paradigm is that astrocytes are the
bridges between neurons and the vasculature to mediate much of
the hyperemic response (4, 8, 10–12). However, this view has
been challenged by data questioning whether astrocytes mediate
an arteriolar response in functional hyperemia (13–16). Studies
also suggest that vasoactivity may originate from deeper layers of
the cortex (17, 18) and that vasodilatory signals may ascend
along the cerebral microcirculation to dilate surface arteries
(17). Whether retrograde vasodilatory signaling can account for
disparate findings regarding the involvement of astrocytes in
NVC needs to be further examined (17).
K+ is a byproduct of every neuronal action potential (AP) (19,
20), and following neuronal stimulation, Ca2+ mobilization in
astrocytic endfeet may open large conductance calcium-activated
potassium (BKCa) channels (4, 5) to increase the K+ efflux.
Thus, neuronal activity can lead to an increase in perivascular/
interstitial K+. Regardless of its neuronal or astrocytic origin, an
increase in extracellular potassium concentration ([K+]o) can
activate vascular inward rectifying potassium (Kir) channels,
resulting in vessel hyperpolarization, dilation, and a subsequent
increase in local CBF (4, 21).
Significance
Local brain activity is rapidly accompanied by a vascular response to increase blood perfusion. How neuronal activity is
sensed by the vasculature is not fully understood. This process,
known as neurovascular coupling, constitutes the physiological
basis of functional neuroimaging scans and its disruption is
associated with cognitive disorders and stroke. We have recently demonstrated the active involvement of capillary endothelial cells in neurovascular communication through the
activity of Kir channels. Here, using a computational modeling
approach, we investigate the biophysical determinants of
capillary-mediated neurovascular coupling. Simulations show
how capillary Kir channels sense neuronal activity and initiate
and amplify electrical signals—through a process that resembles electrical activity in excitable cells—to produce a robust
vasodilatory response.
Author contributions: A.M., M.T.N., and N.M.T. designed research; A.M., B.A., O.F.H., F.D.,
and T.A.L. performed research; A.M., B.A., O.F.H., F.D., T.A.L., and N.M.T. analyzed data;
and A.M., M.T.N., and N.M.T. wrote the paper.
The authors declare no competing interest.
This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.
Published under the PNAS license.
Data deposition: All data and codes associated with this study can be accessed on GitHub
at https://github.com/ntsoukias/ (Capillary-Kir-Model).
1
To whom correspondence may be addressed. Email: tsoukias@fiu.edu.
This article contains supporting information online at https://www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/
doi:10.1073/pnas.2000151117/-/DCSupplemental.
First published June 29, 2020.
16626–16637 | PNAS | July 14, 2020 | vol. 117 | no. 28 www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.2000151117
Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by Johns Hopkins University on March 11, 2022 from IP address 128.220.8.15.
The arteriolar smooth muscle has been considered as the
primary target of NVC mediators. Recent studies, however, put
the endothelial layer at center stage in NVC. Data suggest that
retrograde vasodilatory signals propagate through the endothelial layer to dilate feeding arteries (17, 22), and evidence of
coupling between neuronal activity and the vasculature at the
capillary level has been presented (22, 23). We have recently
proposed that brain capillaries act as a neuronal activity-sensing
network which initiate electrical (hyperpolarizing) signals that
ascend to dilate upstream arterioles and increase local CBF (22).
In support of this proposition, we have shown that local K+ release at distal capillary sites evokes significant and Kir2.1-dependent hyperpolarization and dilation of the feeding PA, and
that hyperemic responses to whisker stimulation are significantly
attenuated in endothelial cell (EC)-specific Kir2.1 knockout
mice (EC Kir2.1−/−) in vivo. Our data suggest extracellular K+ as
a critical mediator for capillary-level NVC and the Kir2.1
channel as the key molecular player for sensing neuronal activitydependent elevations in [K+]o and translating them into retrograde hyperpolarizing signals.
Although our previous work provided strong experimental
evidence for capillary-to-arteriole communication during NVC,
the requirements and determinants of this signal conduction
remain elusive, and are only accessible, at this time, in silico. The
effectiveness of this capillary-initiated vasodilatory signaling will
depend on whether the number of capillary EC (cEC) Kir
channels activated is sufficient to produce a robust local hyperpolarization, and also on the vessels’ conduction properties that
will determine the rate of signal dissipation as it spreads in a
highly intertwined brain microvascular network. In this study, we
utilized a mathematical framework to investigate the underlying
mechanisms that enable capillaries to sense neuronally induced
changes in [K+]o and transmit vasodilatory signals effectively to
upstream contractile vascular segments (i.e., transitional capillaries with contractile pericytes or PAs). Through integration of
model with experimental data, we examine the mechanistic basis
for retrograde electrical signaling in the cerebral microcirculation. Model simulations suggest that K+ can evoke AP-like responses in the endothelial layer through the activation of Kir
channels, enabling capillary-initiated signals to ascend upstream
the vascular network and orchestrate rapid and refined regional
blood flow control. Results highlight the role of Kir channel as a
critical regulator of the hyperemic response.
Results
Modeling cEC Electrophysiology. We investigate electrical signaling
in the brain microcirculation by first developing a mathematical
model for a single cEC. Patch data in freshly isolated mouse
cerebral cECs revealed the presence of functional Kir2.1 and
TRPV4 channels in these cells (22, 25). In contrast to ECs from
all other vascular beds examined up to this date, they do not
express small (SK) and intermediate (IK) conductance calciumactivated K+ channels. To examine the role of these newly
characterized channels (i.e., Kir2.1 and TRPV4) in capillary
electrophysiology, we form minimal mathematical representations (namely models I and II) by reducing a detailed mathematical model of a cEC (adapted from ref. 24 and Fig. 1 A, Left).
This minimalistic approach incorporates explicit descriptions for
the current through Kir and TRPV4 channels, while all other
transmembrane currents are linearized and lumped into a nonspecific background current (Ibg) with a conductance, Gbg
(Fig. 1 A, Right). The proposed simplification allows us to focus
on the key role of Kir/TRPV4 on K+-mediated dynamics in
capillaries and overcome limitations arising from the absence of
functional data for other membrane channels in cECs.
A first minimal model of a cEC (model I) contains an explicit
mathematical description for the Kir current (IKir) and the Ibg:
IKir = GKir
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
K+ [ ]o
√ ( ) Vm − EK
1 + exp Vm−V0.5
k ( ) [1]
Ibg = Gbg (Vm − Ebg ), [2]
where Ebg is the reversal potential for Ibg; EK = RT/F ln([K+]o/
[K+]i) is the Nernst potential for K+ where R, T, and F are the
universal gas constant, temperature, and the Faraday’s constant,
respectively; and V0.5 and k are parameters that describe a sigmoidal inhibition of Kir with membrane depolarization (i.e., Vm
for half-maximal inactivation and the steepness factor, respectively).
The Boltzmann-type formula (Eq. 1) captures the IKir’s inward rectification and the negative slope conductance as Vm approaches
more depolarized potentials (i.e., the inhibition of IKir as Vm depolarizes yields the characteristic N-shaped relationship depicted in
Fig. 2B). The channel’s conductance increases with [K+]o
(GKir = GKir
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
[K+]o
√ ), capturing the activation of the channel by
extracellular K+. Using a standard Hodgkin–Huxley-type formalism, the time-dependent changes in Vm are predicted from Eq. 3:
Cm
dVm
dt + Itot = 0, [3]
where Cm is the membrane capacitance and Itot = IKir + Ibg.
ER
Ca
Ca
If
IKir
ICl
IP3
CSQN
IP3R
NCX
Ca
Ca CaM
Ca
PMCA
G PLC
INSC
NaK
PIP2
ITRPV4
SERCA
A
NaKCl
? IKir
Ibg ITRPV4
PIP2
… …
Ibg,PA
IKir,PA
Igj,PA
Cm,PA
EC-SMC
A
B cEC
Cm
IKir
ITRPV4
Ibg
Igj
… …
R
IPiezo
Fig. 1. (A) Single-cell models of cEC electrophysiology. A detailed model of
cEC incorporates currents through Kir (IKir), TRPV4 (ITRPV4), nonselective cation (NSC) and chloride (Cl) channels, sodium–potassium (NaK) and plasma
membrane-calcium ATPase (PMCA) pumps, sodium–calcium (NCX) exchanger, and the NaKCl cotransport. Other channels such as hyperpolarizationactivated cyclic nucleotide-gated (HCN) channels (If), or piezo channels (Ipiezo)
may be present as suggested by expression data (55). A minimal representation
of the cEC includes explicit descriptions for IKir and ITRPV4, while the rest of the
transmembrane currents are lumped into a nonspecific background current (Ibg).
Kir and TRPV4 activity can be modulated by the levels of PIP2. (B) Simulations of
electrical signal propagation are performed in realistic angioarchitectures
reconstructed from the vibrissa primary sensory cortex of a mouse (26). cECs are
coupled in series through gap junctions to create multicellular capillary segments
and networks. Conduction in arterioles accounts for the number of ECs and
coupled SMCs at each longitudinal position. Each EC–SMC unit is modeled by
including a background current, Ibg,PA = Gbg,PA(Vm – Ebg,PA), based on an effective
membrane conductance of the two-cell system and a net Kir current [IKir,PA =
GKir,PA (Vm – EK)]. Gap junctional currents between neighboring cells in capillaries
(Igj) and in arterioles (Igj,PA) are based on Vm gradients. PAs and pial arteries are
shown in red, veins in blue, and capillaries in gray.
Moshkforoush et al. PNAS | July 14, 2020 | vol. 117 | no. 28 | 16627
PHYSIOLOGY
Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by Johns Hopkins University on March 11, 2022 from IP address 128.220.8.15.
To examine the contribution of TRPV4 to cEC dynamics, we
separate the TRPV4 current (ITRPV4) from the lumped background current in model I (model II). We account for the stochastic opening of TRPV4 and the resulting transient depolarizing
current as described in ref. 25. The simplifying assumptions in the
minimal modeling approach (models I and II) are validated against
the detailed EC model (SI Appendix, Fig. S1).
Multicellular Model of Microvascular Networks. cECs were coupled
through gap junctions to construct multicellular capillary networks. Current flow between adjacent cECs is estimated based on
the electrical gradient and the cEC-to-cEC coupling resistance
(Rgj). Capillary networks were constructed with a geometry that
approximates isolated ex vivo preparations (22) (see Fig. 4 A, Inset)
or were adapted from larger reconstructed microvascular networks
in the brain cortex (26) (Fig. 1B). Conduction of electrical signals in
PAs is accounted by considering three ECs coupled to three SMCs
at each longitudinal position (Fig. 1 B, Inset). Each PA EC–SMC
unit has an effective leak conductance reflecting the net transmembrane resistance (Gbg,PA = 1/Rm,PA, where Rm,PA is the effective membrane resistance of the PA EC–SMC unit) and a total
Kir conductance (GKir,PA). Each EC–SMC unit is coupled to an
adjacent unit through gap junctions (coupling resistance, Rgj,PA).
Kir Mediates Sustained cEC Hyperpolarization in Response to a K+
Challenge. We used mathematical modeling to investigate the
ability of cECs to sense an increase in [K+]o by responding
through Kir activation. Model I captures the salient features of
Kir dynamics in an isolated cEC during a K+ challenge (Fig. 2A).
A moderate increase in [K+]o (i.e., from 3 to 8 mM) opens Kir
channels and produces a sustained hyperpolarization. Simulations show jumps of Vm from a depolarized to a hyperpolarized
potential when [K+]o increases past a critical concentration level
([K+]o ≥ 5 mM in this figure), in agreement with an “all or none”
Vm response in cultured ECs (27) and diameter responses in
PAs, as well as in coronary and cerebral arteries, when increasing
[K+]o (10, 22, 28–30). The critical concentration for the hyperpolarizing Vm jump depends on the Gbg=GKir ratio, as can be
observed in solid vs. dashed blue traces (corresponding to solid
vs. dashed green arrows in the heat map of Fig. 2E, respectively).
Decreasing [K+]o back to resting levels can either return the cEC
Vm to the depolarized resting potential (solid red line) or leave
the cell at a hyperpolarized potential (dashed red line). This
behavior is attributed to the presence of two bifurcation points
(i.e., saddle-node bifurcations), yielding a system that can exhibit
hysteresis during a K+ challenge/washout cycle and bistability
within a K+ concentration window (Fig. 2 B–E). As a consequence of this bistability, small biological variability in channel
densities can yield a binomial distribution of hyperpolarized and
depolarized resting membrane potentials, as observed in cultured ECs (31, 32).
cECs Can Have a Bistable Vm. The stability diagram in Fig. 2E
summarizes the system’s dynamic behavior as we move around in
the parameter space. The diagram depicts the K+ concentration
window for bistability as the ratio of Gbg=GKir changes. As [K+]o
increases or Gbg=GKir decreases, the threshold Vm (unstable
steady state; open circle in Fig. 2C) gets closer to the depolarized
steady state (the solid red circle at depolarized Vm in Fig. 2C).
This lowers the ΔVm threshold, ΔVHyp (and the corresponding
current threshold, ΔIHyp) for jumping from the depolarized to
the hyperpolarized steady state while increasing the ΔVm threshold,
ΔVDep, for transition in the opposite direction (SI Appendix, Fig.
S2). We separate the bistability region in hyperpolarization-favoring
(blue) and depolarization-favoring (red) areas based on the magnitude of ΔVm thresholds required for transition toward one or the
other direction (Fig. 2E). cECs can thus be classified into four
groups according to their Kir conductance relative to the total
transmembrane conductance: cells that have a single depolarized
(yellow region) or hyperpolarized (gray region) steady state,
depolarization-favoring (red region), and hyperpolarizationfavoring (blue region) bistable cells (Fig. 2E).
Studies have previously provided evidence for Kir-mediated
bistable membrane potentials in ECs and SMCs (32, 33). We
examined whether the Kir current density in cECs is sufficient to
create a bistable system at physiological [K+]o. cECs were enzymatically isolated from mouse brain slices (SI Appendix, SI
Materials and Methods) and whole-cell patch data were used to
estimate the Ba2+-sensitive (GKir) and -insensitive (Gbg) transmembrane conductances (Fig. 2F) (22, 34). Channel conductances [GKir = 0.18 ± 0.1 nS/mM0.5; Gbg = 0.06 ± 0.04 nS (n = 24);
mean Cm of 8 pF] place cECs within/near the predicted bistability
[K+]o(mM)
D-state
H-state
Gbg GKir(mM1/2)
0
5
10
15
-30
-20
-10
0
ΔVm(mV)
3 mM 5 mM 8 mM
[K+]o
GKir Cm ( Mm. Fp/ Sn 1/2
) A BCD
F G
E Vm(mV)
Ikir
-Ibg
I (pA)
5 mM
8 mM
Gbg/Cm(nS/pF)
IKir
Ibg
IKir
Ibg ITRPV4
Fig. 2. Single-cEC Vm response to [K+
]o. (A) Simulated Vm responses (model
I) to step increases (blue lines) and decreases (red lines) in [K+
]o show jumps
between hyperpolarized and depolarized Vm and hysteresis. Solid and dotted traces correspond to Gbg=GKir ratios of 0.7 and 0.3 (mM1/2), respectively.
(B–E) Stability analysis. Representative IKir and (−Ibg) traces are depicted as a
function of Vm at increasing (3, 5, and 8 mM) [K+
]o. Intersection points denote steady states (stable: solid circles, unstable: open circle) where the total
current is zero. (B) At low [K+
]o the outward Kir current is small and the cell
rests at a depolarized Vm. (C) Increasing [K+
]o leads to a rightward and upward shift of the IKir curve as a result of the increase in GKir and EK. As the
[K+
]o increases past a critical concentration, the system undergoes a saddlenode bifurcation and three steady states emerge. The depolarized and
hyperpolarized stable steady states (solid red circles) are separated by an
unstable steady state in between (threshold Vm, open circle). (D) Further
increase in [K+
]o drives the system past a second saddle-node bifurcation. The
presence now of only one hyperpolarized steady state will force the cell to
jump to a hyperpolarized Vm close to EK. (E) Stability diagram shows the
parameter space where bistability (depicted in C) exists. Blue/red color map
shows the ΔVm threshold at points within the bistable region, for transition
to a hyperpolarized/depolarized state. (F) Patch-clamp recordings of isolated
cECs (Inset) with 6 mM and 60 mM [K+
]o bath concentrations (n = 24) were
used to estimate Kir and background conductances (GKir = 0.18±0.1 nS/
mM0.5 and Gbg = 0.06 ± 0.04 nS). (G) Minimal model (model II) examines KirTRPV4 dynamics. Stochastic openings of a single TRPV4 channel yield transient depolarizations. At intermediate [K+
]o, transient fluctuations between
two polarization levels are predicted as the system crosses a bifurcation
point during TRPV4 opening. Vm fluctuations are dampened at higher levels
of stimulation as the TRPV4 current is not sufficient to transition the system
to the depolarized state.
16628 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.2000151117 Moshkforoush et al.
Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by Johns Hopkins University on March 11, 2022 from IP address 128.220.8.15.
region at physiological [K+]o (refer to SI Appendix, Supplementary
Information Text and Fig. S2 for the effect of model parameters on
predicted Vm bistability window). Dynamic regulation of the number of active channels per cell can change the percentage of bistable
cells in a population of cECs. Overall, theoretical analysis and experimental data suggest that the presence of a dominant Kir current
in cECs can create a “bistable switch” in Vm, a characteristic of
electrical excitability and a necessary condition for regenerative,
AP-like propagation of electrical signals (35).
TRPV4 Mediates Transient Vm Responses during a K+ Challenge. Stochastic openings of TRPV4 can produce transient depolarizations in Vm (36). At moderate levels of K+ stimulation (i.e., from
3 to 5 mM), the TRPV4 bursting activity can drive the system
past the bifurcation points (i.e., transitioning a cEC from gray to
yellow in Fig. 2E), producing large transient Vm jumps (Fig. 2G
and SI Appendix, Fig. S3C). These results are in line with experimental data where isolated ECs and arterioles exhibit fluctuations between two polarization levels upon stimulation with
intermediate K+ concentrations (∼5 to 8 mM) (27, 32, 37). This
experimentally observed instability suggests a bistable system,
which can be reproduced in silico when accounting for the stochastic opening of TRPV4. The stochastic Vm fluctuations are
dampened with further increasing [K+]o (i.e., ≥8 mM), as the
TRPV4 current is not sufficient to drive the cell past the
threshold to transition to the stable depolarized Vm (Fig. 2G and
SI Appendix, Fig. S3D).
Bistable Cells Amplify Electrical Signals and Promote Hyperpolarizing
Jumps in Capillary Segments. AP firing, as described by Hodgkin–Huxleytype dynamics, is due to the voltage dependency of the Na+ channel’s
(Nav) activation gate that initially creates [i.e., prior to the Nav inactivation or the delayed voltage gated potassium channel [Kv] activation) a bistable Vm (SI Appendix, Fig. S4)]. Thus, from a dynamics
point of view, Vm bistability allows for the “all-or-none” response and
the regenerative propagation of a depolarizing front along neurons
during an AP. By the same token, Kir-induced bistability can facilitate
excitability and regenerative propagation of electrical signals along the
endothelium (35). In Fig. 3A, we formulated a model of a capillary
segment by placing cECs (model I) in series and coupled them via gap
junctions with a cell-to-cell electrical resistance, Rgj. Model simulations
show that at low Kir current densities (GKir = 0.2 nS), a local K+
stimulus produces a small local hyperpolarization that spreads passively
and attenuates along the capillary segment with a length constant
λ = ̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
rm=ri
√ (ri = Rgj=LEC and rm = RmLEC are the axial and membrane resistivities per unit length, respectively, and LEC and Rm are the
cEC length and membrane resistance). At higher Kir conductances
relative to the background current (GKir = 0.4 nS, still within the range
of values obtained from single cEC patch clamp recordings), that is,
when cECs are bistable, the model predicts significant local hyperpolarization (stimulated cells jump close to EK) that spreads without attenuation (i.e., an “excitable” system; Fig. 3 A and B).
The “passive” system resets following stimulus termination in
our capillary model (Fig. 3B; GKir = 0.2 nS), that is, Vm returns
to its basal value upon removal of the stimulus. However, removing the stimulus could not reset Vm in the excitable system
(Fig. 3B; GKir = 0.4 nS), as the local bistable cells did not depolarize by the return of [K+]o to resting levels due to hysteresis
(Fig. 2A, dotted line). Furthermore, as theoretical analysis in ref.
35 indicates, an infinitely long capillary (i.e., capillary length
[L] >> λ) with identical and bistable ECs can promote regenerative conduction of either a hyperpolarizing (blue ECs) or
a depolarizing (red ECs) front, but not both. Thus, the model
capillary cannot return to the resting Vm values upon stimulus
termination under the excitable conditions in Fig. 3B. Similar to
an AP, delayed inactivation/activation of channels may be
required to depolarize the capillary back to resting Vm (discussed
in later sections).
TRPV4 Activity Can Facilitate the System’s Return Following Stimulus
Termination. Model simulations in Fig. 3C suggest that the
presence of TRPV4 channels can provide a resetting mechanism
for the excitable capillary segment in Fig. 3 A and B. Basal
TRPV4 channel activity (SI Appendix, Fig. S5), at levels that
have been observed experimentally (25), was capable of turning
back the “bistable switch” in an excited capillary segment. The
depolarizing effect of stochastic TRPV4 transients along the
capillary segment enables capillary depolarization to resting Vm
0 20 40 60 80
-80
-60
-40
-20 10 mM 10 mM
Ko= 10 (mM)
Vm(mV)
GKir= 0.2 (nS)
GKir= 0.4 (nS)
Cell# Time(s) Time(s)
10 mM
Rgj = 1 MΩ
10 MΩ
100 MΩ
Gkir/Gbg
Gkir/Gbg
ΔVm
(mV)
ΔVm
(mV)
Regenerative
conduction
Passive Passive
Facilitated
Excitable
Regenerative
conduction
Rgj(GΩ) Time(s) Rgj(GΩ)
Resting Vm
Long Segment Short Segment
10 mM 10 mM 10 mM
Rgj = 10MΩ
N = 20cells
Rgj = 10MΩ
N = 200cells
Rgj = 1GΩ
N = 200cells
2cells
4cells
v ≈ 2.4 mm/s
(~120 cells/s)
v ≈ 0.8 mm/s
(~40 cells/s)
Time(s) Time(s) Time(s)
Vm(mV)
A BC
D F E
G H I
Vm(mV)
GKir= 0.2 (nS)
GKir= 0.4 (nS) IKir
Ibg
Igj Igj
IKir
Ibg
Igj Igj
ITRPV4
Fig. 3. Electrical conduction in a capillary segment in response to local elevations of [K+
]o. cECs (model I) were coupled in series to form a model of a
capillary segment. (A) An array of 20 axially connected and identical cECs are
stimulated at the left end (n = 2 cells) with 10 mM K+
. Vm responses are
depicted at rest (dashed line) and following stimulation, for GKir = 0.2 nS and
0.4 nS with Rgj = 10 MΩ. Bistable cECs (GKir = 0.4 nS; blue region in Fig. 2E)
can produce substantially higher local hyperpolarization, compared to passive cECs (GKir = 0.2 nS; yellow region in Fig. 2E), which propagates without
attenuation. (B) Time course of the Vm responses presented in A. The system
resets to the resting depolarized Vm after stimulus termination when low
levels of GKir are assumed (GKir = 0.2 nS; yellow cECs), but it does not when
higher GKir (GKir = 0.4 nS; blue cECs) promotes a hyperpolarizing Vm jump
upon stimulation. Traces for the stimulated cells are shown in green and for
the last cell in red. (C) TRPV4 activity (model II) can facilitate resetting in the
excitable system. (D–F) Level of distal (400 μm/20 cells from stimulus site)
hyperpolarization (ΔVm) color-coded for a long (n = 200 cells) (D) and a short
(n = 20 cells) (F) capillary segment. Depending on GKir and Rgj, passive conduction, facilitated hyperpolarization, or excitability with or without regenerative
propagation of a hyperpolarizing front is predicted. In a long capillary segment,
increasing Rgj (arrow in D) can increase distal hyperpolarization by promoting
regenerative conduction (E). (G) Time course of a hyperpolarizing jump in a
short, well-coupled (Rgj = 10 MΩ) segment upon stimulation of two or four cells
at one end. (H and I) Regenerative propagation of the hyperpolarizing front in a
long segment (n = 200 cells) with Rgj of 100 MΩ (H) and 1 GΩ (I).
Moshkforoush et al. PNAS | July 14, 2020 | vol. 117 | no. 28 | 16629
PHYSIOLOGY
Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by Johns Hopkins University on March 11, 2022 from IP address 128.220.8.15.
levels after stimulus termination (i.e., the current threshold for
transitioning to the depolarized Vm is reduced after the stimulus
is removed). Basal TRPV4 activity can, thus, conditionally facilitate (i.e., depending on the required threshold current) the
return of the capillary to the depolarized resting potential upon
stimulus termination. More robust resetting can be achieved by
the presence of delayed activated currents (SI Appendix, Fig. S6),
or by a progressive down-regulation of Kir activity and/or upregulation of TRPV4 upon stimulation as observed, for example,
during plasma membrane phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate
(PIP2) hydrolysis or reduction of adenosine 5′-triphosphate
(ATP) (25, 34). This would slowly transition cECs from
hyperpolarization-favoring (blue) during stimulus initiation to
depolarization-favoring (red or yellow), enabling capillary Vm to
return to resting potential and protect the system against a
prolonged excitability.
Weak Intercellular Coupling Promotes Regenerative Electrical Conduction.
Whether a K+ challenge can produce a hyperpolarizing jump
(i.e., whether a capillary is “excitable”) depends on the ratio of GKir/
Gbg, the stimulus strength (i.e., number of cells stimulated), and the
coupling between neighboring cECs (Fig. 3 D and F). Interestingly, the
minimum required GKir for excitability decreases as the resistance (Rgj)
between adjacent ECs increases under the conditions of Fig. 3D
(i.e., long capillary segment; L >> λ). Thus, for the given level of
stimulation and Kir activity, significant local and distal hyperpolarization can be achieved only if Rgj is increased within an optimal range
(green arrow in Fig. 3D and traces in Fig. 3E) (35). Our model predicts
that electrical signals can propagate along the endothelium even if Rgj
is in the GΩ range [compared to the Rgj in the MΩ range that enables
robust but passive propagating responses in arteries (38, 39)]. This
behavior is attributed to the enhanced efficacy of K+, as a stimulus
onto cECs, in eliciting a voltage response from a cEC when Rgj is
higher (i.e., current loss to neighboring cells is reduced and opening of
Kir channels induces a larger local change in Vm), which allows for
local hyperpolarization above the ΔVm threshold (ΔVHyp) for “turning
the bistable switch.” Once Vm passes the threshold value, the cEC
jumps to a hyperpolarized potential and drives hyperpolarization of its
neighboring cell, causing a domino-like effect along the capillary (regenerative conduction), analogous to the propagation of APs
in neurons.
Capillary Length, Coupling Resistance, and Amplification of Hyperpolarization.
Simulations in short (relative to λ) capillary segments revealed different
Vm dynamics (Fig. 3F) compared to long segments (Fig. 3D). Significant hyperpolarization can be achieved with lower GKir, and Rgj in the
megaohm range. Stimulation of a few cECs, and the resulting small
initial hyperpolarization, is enhanced by the opening of Kir channels
along the length of the capillary segment. This Kir-mediated facilitation
results in higher levels of local and distal hyperpolarization (facilitated
hyperpolarization), and the fidelity of this response increases with an
elevation in Kir density/activity. This mode of positive feedback by Kir
channels has been theoretically analyzed and experimentally observed
in neurons (40) and in arteries (41–43). Further increase in GKir above
a threshold value, but below what is required for regenerative conduction in Fig. 3D, promotes a hyperpolarizing jump in Vm upon K+
stimulation (excitable region in Fig. 3F). This Kir-mediated segment
excitability differs from the regenerative conduction described in long
segments by the absence of a propagating hyperpolarizing front, that is,
the last cEC jumps to the hyperpolarized Vm before the stimulated
cECs (notice the crossover of the red [last cell] vs. green [stimulated
cells] traces in Fig. 3G compared to Fig. 3 H and I), and by its dependence on the size of the capillary. Stimulation of a sufficient number
of cECs may allow such a spatially confined excitability in a capillary
network. Thus, depending on the length, stimulus strength, gap junctional resistance, and channel densities, focal stimulation of a capillary
segment may result in 1) a relatively small local Vm change that spreads
passively and dissipates with distance (passive system), 2) a more
pronounced local and distal hyperpolarization as the conducted signal is
facilitated by the partial opening of Kir channels in neighboring cells
(facilitated conduction), 3) a segment excitability without the regenerative propagation of a hyperpolarizing front (excitable system),
and 4) a full-blown regenerative propagating hyperpolarizing front
(regenerative conduction).
Conduction Velocity. In a capillary with passive characteristics
(i.e., constant Rm), the ratio of λ to the characteristic time
constant τ = CmRm (∼130 ms) (i.e., v = λ=τ = LEC= Cm
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
rirm
√ ( );
∼0.6 to 6 mm/s) governs the time to record a detectable Vm
change at a distal cell upon local stimulation. Distal Vm will
continue to rise and approach a new steady-state value within
milliseconds as dictated by τ. In Fig. 3 G–I we examine the
conduction velocity in capillary segments under conditions that
promote the opening of distal Kir channels (i.e., nonpassive
conductions). In a short capillary segment (L = 200 μm; Rgj = 10
MΩ), distal cells respond fast upon K+ stimulation (λ=τ at rest is
∼6 mm/s) and detectable Vm changes are predicted at the distal
end within tens of milliseconds (Fig. 3G). Thus, cECs in a short
and well-coupled capillary segment responds nearly simultaneously to the K+ stimulus. However, the time for the capillary
segment to rise to the new steady-state Vm depends on the
stimulus strength (number of cells stimulated) and can become
significantly slower than τ. This behavior suggests that the response dynamics of distal cECs are not limited by the time to
charge the cells’ membrane capacitance, but rather by the rate of
progressive Kir channel recruitment as Vm hyperpolarizes. Experimental data in small isolated capillary networks (Fig. 4A)
demonstrate such characteristics, providing evidence for a Kirmediated amplification of the propagating electrical signal.
In long capillary segments (L = 4,000 μm; Rgj = 100 MΩ to 1
GΩ; λ=τ = 2 to 0.6 mm/s), distal cells respond with a delay
(reflecting the delayed arrival of the hyperpolarizing front) followed by a fast transition to a hyperpolarized Vm (Fig. 3 H and
I). The conduction velocity of the hyperpolarizing front is v ≈ 40
cECs/s or ≈ 0.8 mm/s for Rgj of 1 GΩ (Fig. 3I), and increases to
120 cECs/s ≈ 2.4 mm/s, if Rgj = 100 MΩ (Fig. 3H). The latter is
still three orders of magnitude less than typical conduction velocities in unmyelinated neuronal axons, owing to approximately
three orders of magnitude larger membrane (rm) and axial (ri)
resistivities of a capillary to those of axons (SI Appendix,
Table S1).
Evidence for Regenerative Hyperpolarization in the Brain Microcirculation—
an Inverted Sustained AP. We have recently provided ample evidence
that elevation of K+ around capillaries transmits electrical signals to
upstream arterioles (22). Picospritzing 10 mM K+ onto a few capillary
ends in an ex vivo preparation of a PA with attached capillaries
(Cap-PA) (Fig. 4 A, Right, Inset) (SI Appendix, SI Materials and
Methods) caused significant hyperpolarization (up to 30 mV) and
maximal dilation of the PA, hundreds of microns away from the
stimulus site (Fig. 4A). However, the magnitude of outward Kir current
in cECs (often below the limit of detection in patch-clamp experiments) suggests that K+ stimulation of a few cECs can only generate
up to a few picoamperes of hyperpolarizing current. By comparison,
equivalent conducted responses in small arterioles typically require
several nanoamperes of stimulating current (38, 44, 45). This disparity
in stimulatory current requirement cannot be explained by differences
in size or in the number of cells between arteries and capillaries. How
does the stimulation of a few cECs produce robust dilations in upstream feeding arteries?
We formulated a model capillary-PA network that resembles
the Cap-PA preparation and examined the effect of increasing
[K+]o on cECs located on one end of the capillary branch (∼15%
of total cECs in the network). Simulations assume a heterogeneous population of cECs with variable number of active Kir
16630 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.2000151117 Moshkforoush et al.
Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by Johns Hopkins University on March 11, 2022 from IP address 128.220.8.15.
channels to account for biological variability, similar to values
observed experimentally (Fig. 2F). As the mean GKir increases,
the majority of the cell population shifts from passive (yellow) to
depolarization-favoring (red) to hyperpolarization-favoring
(blue), as shown in the respective pie charts in Fig. 2F. A heterogeneous capillary network behaves passively when most cells
are passive or depolarization-favoring and remains insensitive to
K+ stimulation (Fig. 4C). This response is comparable to that of
a capillary network without Kir channels (EC Kir−/−) which is
locally stimulated with an equivalent current injection (Fig. 4B).
Thus, the model predicts a limited hyperpolarization of the
feeding PA (black trace) under passive conditions, significantly
below the observed 20- to 30-mV arteriolar response observed
experimentally (Fig. 4A). The effect from an equivalent local
stimulation in vivo is expected to be even lower since the current
would disperse in both upstream and downstream directions and
to every connected side branch. Thus, comparison of ex vivo and
in silico data suggests that amplification of the capillary-initiated
electrical signaling, by a mechanism intrinsic to the microvascular
network, is essential to explain our experimental observations.
When a higher Kir density is assumed (mean GKir = 0.6 nS),
the majority of cECs become bistable, and the K+ challenge
produces a local hyperpolarization that is enhanced by the Vminduced opening of cECs along the capillary network (Fig. 4D).
A network containing mostly bistable and hyperpolarizationfavoring (i.e., blue) cECs (Fig. 4E) produces significant local
response upon stimulation (Vm jumps close to EK), and the
predicted level of PA hyperpolarization is comparable to the
experimentally observed SMC responses in Fig. 4A. Furthermore, the Vm traces in Fig. 4E can account for the slow increase
in Vm hyperpolarization observed in Fig. 4A as Kir channels are
progressively recruited. Additionally, consistent with the observations in Fig. 4A, the return of the system to its resting Vm in
Fig. 4E is delayed, since the bistable system can stay at a
hyperpolarized potential following stimulus termination until the
relative Kir activity drops below the threshold for turning the
“bistable switch.” At Kir activity levels below the requirement for
excitability, amplification of hyperpolarization (facilitated conduction) and a passive return (i.e., without the need of TRPV4
or dynamic changes in channel conductances) to resting levels
following stimulus termination is observed (Fig. 4D).
Fig. 4F presents summary data from simulations using the
Cap-PA model as the mean GKir varies from 0 to 1.2 nS, with
cECs modeled using model I. In a relatively well-coupled network (Rgj = 10 MΩ), sufficient Kir activity (GKir = 0.8 nS)
promotes a Vm jump to values close to EK upon K+ stimulation
(10 mM) even with only 15% of total cECs stimulated. As the
leakiness of the PA increases, or the number of stimulated cells
decreases, higher Kir activity is required to promote significant
PA hyperpolarization through network excitability. Collectively,
simulation results suggest that even with conservative estimates
for critical parameter values (Rgj = 10 MΩ, n = 15 cells [30% of
total cEC stimulated], rm,PA = 5 GΩcm), the observed PA SMC
hyperpolarization in the experiments (up to 30 mV) cannot be
explained unless the capillary-initiated signal is significantly
amplified by bistable ECs as it is conducted toward the PA, that
is, an excitable system.
Binary vs. Graded Responses of Capillary Modules to K+ Stimulus.
Simulations using realistic angioarchitectures allow us to relate
the ex vivo data to in vivo function. We used a small segment of
an in vivo capillary network reconstruction from the vibrissa
primary sensory cortex of a mouse (adapted from ref. 26) with its
feeding PA and a draining parenchymal venule (PV) to examine
how neuronal signals are integrated in capillaries to produce
hyperpolarization (dilation) of the feeding arteriole (Fig. 5C).
Simulations assume a heterogeneous population of cECs with
variable number of active Kir channels to account for biological
variability. We examine the effect of changing the mean GKir in
the capillary network—probing the system’s ability to dynamically regulate Kir activity, as occurs through PIP2/ATP depletion
(25, 34). Simulations in Fig. 5A show that stimulating a small
number of randomly distributed cECs (∼10 to 14% of total
cECs, highlighted in white) with 10 mM K+ can hyperpolarize
the feeding PA. When the mean cEC GKir is small (i.e., 0.1 nS;
yellow cECs), a passive capillary network is insensitive to K+
stimulation. As the mean GKir (and the percentage of bistable
cECs) increases, so does the sensitivity of the microvasculature
to local K+ stimulation. In a relatively well-coupled network
(Rgj = 50 MΩ), graded increases in PA hyperpolarization are
predicted as the number of stimulated cECs increases (Fig. 5A;
mean GKir = 0.4 and 0.5 nS). Above a mean GKir threshold (>0.5
nS, where majority of cECs are hyperpolarization-favoring
bistable), a highly sensitive capillary module allows maximum
hyperpolarization when a sufficient number of cells (≥12% of
cECs) are stimulated, and the module operates in a binary (on/
off) mode. Summary results for the model network are presented
in Fig. 5B. Depending on the level of Kir activity, the microvascular network can exhibit graded or “all-or-none” responses
as the number of stimulated cells increase, and for a given
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
0 20 40 60 80
-80
-60
-40
-20
0 20 40 60 80
-80
-60
-40
-20
0 20 40 60 80
-80
-60
-40
-20
0 20 40 60 80
-80
-60
-40
-20
V CMS AP m
10s
10 mM
10 mM 10 mM
10s
Vm
Recording
30% cECs
Gbg,PA = 0.3 nS
control
EC Kir-/-
GKir = 0.6 nS
GKir = 0.8 nS
10 mM 10 mM PA SMC ΔVm 30 mV
GKir = 0.4 nS
K+
K+ K+
Vm(mV) Vm(mV)
Time(s) Time(s)
Mean Gkir(nS)
-30
-40
-50
-60 Vm(mV)
A
B F C
D E
ΔVm(mV)
4 pA
Fig. 4. K+
-induced electrical signaling in an ex vivo capillary-PA preparation. (A) Smooth muscle Vm recordings in an isolated and pressurized PA
with the attached capillary network (Inset) when 10 mM K+ is picospritzed
onto the capillary ends. (Left) Representative traces from three mice. (Right)
The average (± SD) of six recordings from five mice. (B–E) Model simulations
in a corresponding, microvascular network (Inset) that contains 45 cECs
(represented by model II) and a 200-μm segment of a PA consisting of 30
coupled EC–SMC units. A localized region at one end of the capillary network is stimulated by injecting 4 pA of current in B (to simulate a response in the
absence of EC Kir [EC Kir−/− mice]), or via application of 10 mM K+ to 7 cECs in
C–E. In C–E GKir in each cEC is assigned from a normal distribution with SD of
0.2 nS and the mean GKir progressively increases from 0.4 to 0.6 and 0.8 nS. In E,
the activity of cEC Kir and TRPV4 is dynamically regulated (i.e., gradual decrease
in Kir and increase in TRPV4 conductance with time constants of 3 and 6 min,
respectively). (F) Summary data for the predicted level of PA hyperpolarization
(at ∼120 μm away from the capillary–PA junction), shown as mean ± SD of 30
simulations with random Kir distributions. cECs are represented with model I.
Control conditions (n = 7 cECs [∼15%] stimulated; Gbg,PA = 0.2 nS); leftmost trace
(n = 15 cECs [∼30%] stimulated; Gbg,PA = 0.2 nS); rightmost trace (n = 7 cECs
[∼15%] stimulated; Gbg,PA = 0.3 nS). Pie charts indicate the resting distribution of
cECs based on the classification in Fig. 2E.
Moshkforoush et al. PNAS | July 14, 2020 | vol. 117 | no. 28 | 16631
PHYSIOLOGY
Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by Johns Hopkins University on March 11, 2022 from IP address 128.220.8.15.
stimulatory scenario, modulation of GKir can regulate the fidelity
of the response. In larger microvascular network simulations,
graded responses can be achieved by summation of binary inputs
from multiple activated capillary network regions (SI Appendix,
Fig. S7).
Retrograde Electrical Signaling through Capillaries and PAs. We used
simulations in larger realistic microvascular network reconstructions to test whether a focal stimulation deep in the cortex
can be conducted to the surface microcirculation to cause a robust dilation and a pronounced increase in local CBF. We first
examined the propagation of electrical activity upon direct focal
stimulation of a PA. In simulations of Fig. 6A we stimulate a PA
segment (100 μm in length), approximately located in cortical
layer IV or layer VI, with 10 mM K+. Under control conditions,
we assume a relatively modest Kir activity in both capillaries and
PAs (i.e., GKir = 0.3 nS, GKir,PA = 0.65 nS). The model predicts
only a few millivolts of arteriolar hyperpolarization in this scenario. The fidelity of local K+ stimulation and the efficiency of
electrical conduction along the PA were significantly affected by
the level of cEC coupling in the surrounding capillaries; this is
attributed to the increased dissipation of the electrical signal at
capillary branching points as Rgj decreases. Results also demonstrate dependence on the location of focal stimulation. A
higher number of branching points in the deeper layers of the
cortex leads to attenuated hyperpolarization and less-efficient
electrical conduction when the PA is stimulated in approximately layer VI vs. in layer IV (Fig. 6B). Despite the inhibitory
effect of the capillary network on the retrograde signaling
through the PA, conditions could be identified (GKir,PA = 2.4 nS;
Rgj = 100 MΩ) that would promote PA excitability and significant hyperpolarization of the feeding surface arteries. Overall,
simulation results suggest that significant upstream hyperpolarization upon focal PA stimulation with K+ requires sufficient Kir
channel density to amplify the stimulatory current and a high
coupling resistance at branching capillaries to limit the dissipation of the conducting current toward the capillary network.
Stimulating cECs in addition to PA ECs can facilitate vasodilatory signals to ascend toward the surface circulation. Simulations show that K+-induced stimulation of surrounding cECs,
in addition to a direct stimulation of the PA segment, increases
the local stimulatory current, and as a result increases ascending
hyperpolarization through the PA (Fig. 6A). Furthermore, under
conditions that promote regenerative conduction in the capillary
network, such as increased Kir density and low gap junctional
coupling, stimulation of a few cECs can elicit robust retrograde
electrical signaling in the brain. In Fig. 7 we tested whether
stimulation of cECs deep in the cortex can be transmitted to the
upstream PAs and surface pial arteries. Approximately 200 cECs
within a 10-nL tissue volume were stimulated with 10 mM K+. In
Fig. 7 A, Middle, a significant Kir channel density (Gkir = 0.6 nS)
resulted in local excitability (∼30 mV of hyperpolarization) and
the hyperpolarizing signal remained confined in the stimulated
area. The hyperpolarizing influence on the PA was rather
modest (a few millivolts) and local. Increasing the number of
stimulated capillary regions could produce robust PAs hyperpolarization (SI Appendix, Fig. S7). In Fig. 7A, Right, as well as in
Fig. 7B, we examined the effect of preferentially distributing
capillary Kir channels closer to PAs while maintaining a similar
average Kir density in the capillary network. Simulations assume
a gradient in capillary Kir conductance (GKir reduces from 1.2 nS
in capillaries close to PA to 0.3 nS in capillaries close to the
venular end of the network) and an increased Rgj (400 MΩ) to
promote regenerative conduction. Simulation results show that
the same stimulatory scenario as before yields a significant local
hyperpolarization that regeneratively ascends through the capillary network toward the surface microvasculature (Fig. 7).
Thus, the electrical signal can efficiently propagate through the
capillary network as a result of conditions that promote regenerative conduction, allowing stimulations deep in the cortex
to be transmitted over long distances and affect tone of upstream
PAs and surface pial arteries. The regenerative electrical signaling was spatially confined (Fig. 7, top view) and preferentially
directed toward PAs and surface arteries by the gradient in
Kir density.
Discussion
Capillary ECs in the brain have been extensively studied in the
context of the blood–brain barrier, yet very little is known about
their electrophysiological properties. The high capillary density
in the brain allows for a close proximity of cECs to every neuron,
thus uniquely positioning them to monitor neuronal activity.
However, whether the capillary endothelium is capable of sensing neuronal activity and transmitting signals to cause upstream
vasodilation—a question with profound implications for global
0.1 0.4 0.5 0.6
CEc %01 CEc %21 CEc %41
Gkir(nS)
ΔVm(mV)
Arteriole
Venule
Capillary
-200
-300
-400
-500 z(μm)
-20
-40
-60
-80
Vm(mV)
A B
C
Fig. 5. Binary or graded electrical responses in microvascular networks. (A)
Predicted Vm hyperpolarization (color-coded) in a capillary network reconstruction from the vibrissa primary sensory cortex of a mouse with its
feeding PA and draining venule, stimulated with 10 mM of [K+
]o (stimulated
sites are highlighted with white circles). Vascular geometry from ref. 26. A
heterogeneous population of cECs with different Kir densities is assumed
(normal distribution of cEC GKir with SD of 0.2 nS). Simulations for different
mean cEC GKir and various number of randomly selected cECs stimulated (as
a percentage of total in the network) are presented. At low levels of mean
GKir (0.1 nS, first column), the system is insensitive to K+ stimulus for the
number of stimulated cells examined. Increasing the mean GKir level (0.4 and
0.5 nS, second and third columns) places more cECs in the bistable region,
and the level of evoked PA hyperpolarization is enhanced as the number of
stimulated cECs increase. Further increase in the mean GKir makes the capillary network highly sensitive to K+ stimulus (fourth column, mean GKir = 0.6
nS, majority of cells are hyperpolarization-favoring). Surpassing a threshold
number of stimulated cells results in a hyperpolarizing jump for the entire
capillary network, which in turn increases the level of PA hyperpolarization.
(B) Summary data for the mean PA hyperpolarization in A. Pie charts show
the distribution of cECs at mean GKir levels of 0.1, 0.4, 0.5, and 0.6 nS, respectively. Data are shown as mean ± SD averaging results from 30 trials
with randomly distributed Kir densities and stimulated cECs. (C) Schematic of
the network used for the simulations in A and B where capillaries are
depicted in gray, the feeding PA in red, and the draining PV in blue. Simulations use model I for cECs and Rgj = 50 MΩ.
16632 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.2000151117 Moshkforoush et al.
Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by Johns Hopkins University on March 11, 2022 from IP address 128.220.8.15.
NVC mechanisms—has received little research attention. Recent experimental evidence indicates that capillaries may act as a
sensory web to detect neuronal activity through Kir channelmediated sensing of local elevations in [K+]o (22). These
changes can be communicated by a hyperpolarizing electrical
signal from capillaries to PAs through the endothelial layer.
Together with direct activation of arteriolar (SMC and EC) Kir
channels by K+ from astrocytes and/or neurons, the capillaryinitiated electrical signals can produce stable vasodilation and hyperemia. Model analysis in this study elucidates the biophysical
determinants of K+ sensing by cECs and the parameters/mechanisms that regulate retrograde electrical signal transmission from
capillaries to upstream feeding arteries in the brain.
The Capillary Kir Channel as a Sensor of K+
. Activation of Kir family
members by Vm and [K+]o has been well characterized and likely
reflects unblocking of the channels by internal polyamines (46).
As [K+]o increases, the current–voltage relationship shifts in an
upward and rightward direction (Fig. 2 B–D) due to an increase
in GKir, EK, and V0.5 (Eq. 2). Consequently, the Kir activity at
resting Vm increases. For example, at resting conditions (Vm ≈
−30 mV), increasing [K+]o from 3 mM to 10 mM causes an
∼100-fold increase in Kir chord conductance (from ∼0.0006 nS
to ∼0.07 nS). However, this 100-fold increase in conductance
yields only a small (subpicoampere) increase in the outward,
hyperpolarizing current at resting potentials. The K+-induced
Kir opening, however, can be self-amplifying since the cell hyperpolarizes in response to the increased IKir, which can further
increase activity through channel opening by Vm hyperpolarization. Mathematical analysis (Fig. 2) quantifies this effect and
shows how small increases in [K+]o can exert a profound
hyperpolarizing effect as a result of a bifurcation that promotes a
hyperpolarizing jump when a threshold [K+]o is crossed. Thus,
the Kir channel acts essentially as an “on–off” switch to rapidly
and profoundly hyperpolarize the cell membrane in capillaries
and arterioles when extracellular K+ increases.
Kir-Mediated Control of Microvascular Vm. ECs are classified as
electrically nonexcitable cells; however, studies have often
revealed nontypical Vm dynamics: Two resting potentials have
been observed in cultured EC monolayers (31, 32), and isolated
ECs may exhibit spontaneous transitions between a hyperpolarized and a depolarized potential when bath K+ increases
(24, 27). Similarly, all-or-none responses to increasing [K+]o (10,
22, 28–30, 47) and spontaneous transitions between two polarization levels (37) have been documented in isolated cerebral
arteries, and evidence for Vm bistability in cerebral SMCs has
also been presented (33). Although the presence of Kir current is
a prerequisite for these responses, the underlying mechanisms and
physiological relevance have not been elucidated. Model simulations performed in this study show how bistable cells can amplify
incoming electrical signals and under certain conditions promote
excitability and regenerative conduction (Figs. 3F and 5–7).
Layer IV
PA
Layer VI
PA
Layer VI
PA + Cap
-400
-600
-800
-1000
-400
-600
-800
-1000
-400
-600
-800
-1000
-25
-30
-35
-40
-45
-50
Vm(mV)
0.6 1.2 2.4
Gkir,PA(nS)
10 50 100
Rgj(MΩ)
z(μm)
PA
stimulation
Layer VI
A B
C
Fig. 6. Ascending [K+
]o-mediated hyperpolarization along penetrating arterioles in a reconstructed microvascular network. A 1,000- × 500- × 500-μm3
reconstructed network containing ∼8,000 cECs, feeding PAs, and draining
PVs is utilized to investigate the effect of focal K+ stimulation on microvascular network hyperpolarization. Vascular geometry from ref. 26. Each cEC is
modeled using model I. (A) Vm response is presented color-coded following
stimulation of a PA segment (100 μm) located approximately in cortical
layers IV or VI with 10 mM K+ (highlighted white box). Simulations show
level of PA hyperpolarization as GKir,PA and Rgj increase, and when the surrounding cECs (within a 4-nL volume; 50 cECs) are also exposed to 10 mM
[K+
]o. (B and C) Summary data comparing the average level of PA hyperpolarization upon focal stimulation of the PA at two different depths (layer
IV vs. layer VI) (B), or a focal PA simulation with or without stimulation of
surrounding capillaries (C).
-400
-600
-800
-1000
-200
z(μm)
-25
-30
-35
-40
-45
-50
-55
-60
Vm(mV)
-400
-600
-800
-1000 z(μm)
t = 0 s t = 0.5 s t = 1 s
t w = 1.5 s t = 2 s t = 2.5 s Top vie
-20
-30
-40
-50
-60
-70
-80
Vm(mV)
A
B
Fig. 7. Kir-mediated control of electrical conduction in microvascular networks. (A) Simulations of electrical signal propagation in a reconstructed
network containing ∼25,000 cells within a 500-nL volume. K+ stimulation of
cECs deep within the cortex (white dots, Left) results in local excitability
(Middle) or in regenerative electrical conduction toward the surface vessels
(Right). Vascular geometry from ref. 26. Two hundred cECs within approximately a 10-nL volume are stimulated with 10 mM of K+
. Higher Rgj and
preferential distribution of Kir channels in the vicinity of PAs (Right) promote regenerative (AP-like) conduction of electrical signals (Middle: Rgj = 50
MΩ, Gkir = 0.6 nS; Right: Rgj = 400 MΩ, Gkir = 1.2 to 0.4 nS [decreasing 0.1 nS
per generation from the arteriolar to the venular end of the network]). (B)
Time course of ascending electrical signaling under conditions promoting
regenerative conduction. Similar to A, preferential distribution of Kir in cECs near
PAs promotes regenerative propagation of electrical signals (Rgj = 100 MΩ, Gkir is
1.2 nS in the vicinity of PA and 0.3 nS away from the PA). Network Vm distribution is depicted at different time points from stimulus initiation (t = 0; 10 mM
of K+
). A hyperpolarizing front ascends toward the surface vasculature without
attenuation, while it remains spatially confined near the feeding PA (top view,
Bottom Right). Each cEC in the network is represented by model I.
Moshkforoush et al. PNAS | July 14, 2020 | vol. 117 | no. 28 | 16633
PHYSIOLOGY
Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by Johns Hopkins University on March 11, 2022 from IP address 128.220.8.15.
Are ECs Capable of Carrying APs? The inward rectification of the
Kir by channel pore blockers provides the characteristic
N-shaped current–voltage relationship that resembles, albeit
inverted, the Vm dependence of the Nav activation gate that
underlies neuronal APs (SI Appendix, Fig. S4). This nonlinear
dependence on voltage allows for the creation of bistable systems
in capillaries and neurons that can promote hyperpolarizing and
depolarizing jumps upon threshold excitation (Fig. 2 and SI
Appendix, Fig. S4). Model simulations demonstrate that AP-like
electrical responses are possible in capillaries when there is
sufficient Kir density (Fig. 3).
Experiments have provided evidence of bistability in ECs (27)
and mechanisms exist to modulate Kir activity (i.e., regulation by
[K+]o and PIP2/ATP) (25, 34) and thus adjust/regulate the percentage of bistable ECs in a microvascular network. Most importantly, experiments in capillary networks have shown
threshold excitation and robust all-or-none responses (supplementary figure 5 in ref. 22)—the salient features of an AP.
Unlike neuronal APs, the inverted (i.e., hyperpolarizing) burst of
electrical activity in cECs is mediated by K+ efflux rather than
Na+ influx and does not spontaneously reset, allowing for a
prolonged and stimulus-dependent duration of activity. Compared to neurons, capillaries form a low-intensity system with
transmembrane current densities on the order of 0.5 pA/pF, almost 1,000-fold lower that typical current densities in mammalian axons (20). Higher membrane (rm = 30 MΩcm) and axial
(ri = 5 to 500 GΩ/cm for Rgj = 10 MΩ to 1 GΩ) resistances yield
much lower conduction velocities in capillaries (millimeters per
second) compared to neurons (meters per second) (Fig. 3 H and
I). Thus, the predicted vascular AP resembles a low-intensity,
inverted, neuronal AP which can be sustained during stimulation
and has a much slower conduction velocity.
Evidence for Kir-Mediated Amplification of Electrical Signaling. K+
stimulation of a few cECs can yield robust Kir-mediated hyperpolarization and dilation of the feeding PA several hundred
microns away in an ex vivo preparation and in vivo (22). The
levels of evoked hyperpolarization are remarkable when one
considers the small outward Kir currents recorded in isolated
cECs and the small number of cECs stimulated in the experiments (22). Model analysis here consolidates experimental data
in isolated cECs with integrated responses in capillary networks
and shows that the evoked arteriolar hyperpolarization cannot be
explained by a passive electrical spread from the stimulated
capillary segment to the PA (Fig. 4 B and C). We thus propose
that the significant arteriolar hyperpolarization in the ex vivo
Cap-PA preparation, as well as in the in vivo data (22), suggests
amplification of electrical signals in the cerebral microcirculation. Simulations reveal a significant potential of Kir channels for
amplifying conducted electrical signals, providing the means to
induce significant upstream dilations in response to small local
stimulatory currents (Figs. 4–7).
Analog vs. Digital Mode of Microvascular Network Hyperpolarization.
Simulations show that a progressive increase in Kir activity can
transition a capillary segment (Fig. 3) or a microcirculatory region (Fig. 5) from insensitive to K+ stimuli (passive system) to
one of intermediate sensitivity with responses graded to the level
of stimulation (facilitated conduction) to a sensitive and binary
(on/off) sensory web (excitable with/without propagating front).
Thus, dynamic modulation of Kir by [K+]o, PIP2, or membrane
potential can regulate the system’s fidelity/sensitivity and the
ability to work in a digital or analog fashion. Binary responses in
capillary regions can be integrated to hyperpolarize feeding arteries at levels that increase as more regions are stimulated.
Under this scenario, the blood flow response can be graded by
the number of activated regions (SI Appendix, Fig. S7).
Space-Clamped Excitability or AP-Like Propagation. Parametric
analysis in models depicting capillary segments or networks
revealed conditions that can promote hyperpolarizing jumps
upon K+ stimulation. Conditions that promote excitability were
identified in short, well-coupled capillary segments after local
stimulation (Fig. 3F), in isolated networks (Fig. 5A), and in
larger vascular architectures (SI Appendix, Fig. S7) when a small
percentage of locally distributed cECs were stimulated. Experimental data provide evidence for capillary excitability in isolated
ex vivo microvascular networks stimulated locally by 10 mM K+
(Fig. 4A). Model simulations show how these hyperpolarizing
jumps can be achieved with lower Kir densities than what is required for regenerative (AP-like) conduction, and how they
could reset following stimulus termination by basal levels of
TRPV4 activity (Fig. 3C). This process could be supported by
delayed changes in transmembrane currents (including, e.g., If, ICl,
IPiezo, or INaK) which would slowly shift the balance of depolarizing
and hyperpolarizing forces during stimulation (SI Appendix, Text
and Fig. S6). For instance, the upstream conduction of a vasodilatory response can increase flow and pressure to downstream
vascular regions—relative to their pressure at rest, prior to stimulation. Pressure increases can activate mechanosensitive channels,
such as EC Piezo1 channels, shifting the balance of hyperpolarizing/
depolarizing currents and resetting Vm. Down-regulation of Kir
and/or up-regulation of TRPV4 activity following the hyperpolarizing stimulus could also enable resetting (Fig. 4E).
Higher Kir density can promote regenerative conduction of
electrical signals and translate picoamperes of stimulatory signal
into robust dilatory responses several hundred microns away.
This condition would provide maximum sensitivity to the capillary network and the ability to modulate blood flow based on
neuronal activity almost at the single neuron level, as local
stimulation of few cECs can drive Vm responses in feeding PA
and even in surface pial arteries (Fig. 7). Capillary network operation under this mode requires high GKir and an active
mechanism for network resetting following stimulus termination.
As in the excitable conditions, the mechanism that would allow
such a response is not known. Delayed activation/inactivation of
channels (If, ICl, IPiezo, or INaK), changes in ionic concentrations
([K+]o, [Na]i), mechanical (pressure and shear), or chemical
stimuli may contribute to the resetting of an AP-like conducted
response (SI Appendix, Fig. S6). Additionally, ECs exhibit local
calcium transients which reflect local release of neurotransmitters, EC Gq-protein-coupled receptor (GqPCR) activation, and
PIP2 depletion (25, 48). These events likely reflect “stop signs”
for hyperpolarizing signals via attenuating Kir activity (while
enhancing depolarizing TRPV4 activity) and thus could shape
the spatiotemporal characteristics of the vasodilatory signaling.
Since a regenerative electrical signal can travel without attenuation in the highly interconnected brain capillary network, a
mechanism should exist for spatial confinement. Furthermore,
for efficient CBF control the electrical signal needs to be directed preferentially toward the upstream feeding arterioles.
Evidence for heteromeric connexin channels that allow unidirectional conduction of electrical signals has been presented and
may provide a mechanism for guiding such signaling in the vasculature (49, 50). In representative simulations, we show how a
regenerative electrical signal can ascend toward the upstream
feeding vessels when a Kir density/activity gradient from the venular
to the arteriolar side of the capillary network exists (Fig. 7). Thus,
excitability with (Fig. 7) or without (SI Appendix, Fig. S7) an AP-like
propagation can be spatially confined and allow vasodilatory signals
to travel significant distances and preferentially ascend toward upstream feeding arterioles and surface arteries.
PA vs. Capillary-Mediated NVC. Simulations using realistic representation of the microvascular geometry provide a way to test the
physiological relevance of stimulating PAs and/or capillaries
16634 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.2000151117 Moshkforoush et al.
Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by Johns Hopkins University on March 11, 2022 from IP address 128.220.8.15.
under different scenarios. Model simulations suggest that conduction along PAs can be significantly inhibited by current losses
to branching capillaries, particularly in the deeper layers of the
cortex where there is a higher density of capillaries branching off
the PAs (Fig. 6). The model predicts that a level of electrical
coupling between ECs in the capillaries similar to that in the PAs
(i.e., Rgj = Rgj,PA = 10 MΩ) can have a strong inhibitory effect on
electrical signal propagation along the PAs (Fig. 6A). For weakly
coupled capillaries, however, focal stimulation of a PA segment and
the resulting local hyperpolarization can ascend along the arteriole
and potentially reach the surface microcirculation. This would require a strong local hyperpolarizing current (i.e., activation of calcium activated potassium [KCa] channels) or a significant PA Kir
density to amplify weaker stimulatory currents.
Our model simulations corroborate previous experimental
findings for the presence of an alternative/parallel mechanism,
aside from already-known mechanisms of NVC through arteriolar SMCs, to communicate neuronal activity to the vasculature
by stimulating cECs (22). The resulting hyperpolarizing signal could
propagate through the capillary network and feed into and dilate
upstream PAs. Simulations identify conditions where stimulation of
a small population of cECs can promote hyperpolarization of their
feeding PA (Fig. 5). Furthermore, regenerative conduction of
electrical signals can provide physiologically relevant spread of hyperpolarization through the microcirculation (Fig. 7), allowing signals initiated deep in the cortex to ascend and reach the surface
microcirculation to evoke robust local CBF increase.
Model Limitations. We use minimal models to simulate electrical
communication in the cerebral microcirculation. More detailed
representations of ECs, pericytes, and SMCs should be developed as electrophysiological data become more readily
available. The modeled capillary does not account for the presence of pericytes. The PA model assumes that a coupled EC/
SMC pair is isopotential and neglects nonlinearities arising from
the activity of Ca2+- and voltage-activated channels. Values for
several of the model’s parameters need to be more accurately
quantified, as estimated values vary significantly in the literature
(SI Appendix, Supplementary Information Text). A parametric
analysis shows that retrograde electrical signaling is sensitive to
several parameters (i.e., GKir, Gbg, Rgj, ΔVKir, and [K+]o), which
can represent critical points of regulatory control (SI Appendix,
Fig. S2). The parameter space that enables 1) robust hyperpolarization in isolated cells/capillaries, 2) local hyperpolarizing
jumps in capillary networks, and 3) long-range regenerative
conduction in microvascular networks becomes progressively
more restricted. Experimental studies should test whether mean
parameter values fall within the required parameter space and
whether biological variability allows for robustness in predicted
responses. Whether electrical signals can regeneratively propagate over long distances in microvascular networks needs to be
confirmed experimentally. Efficient blood flow control would
require tight spatiotemporal control of such signaling, including
mechanisms that would promote directional propagation and
robust resetting to resting potentials upon stimulus termination.
The mechanisms that would allow such control have not been
determined. Experiments should test whether changes in ionic
concentrations, delayed activation of channels, or mechanical/
chemical stimuli contribute to resetting. TRPV4/Kir activity
modulation by mechanical forces or by NVC mediators (e.g.,
prostaglandin E2 [PGE2] and epoxyeicosatrienoic acids [EETs])
needs to be examined for its contribution in shaping the spatiotemporal characteristics of the vasodilatory response.
Summary
In this study, we utilized mathematical modeling to determine
the biophysical determinants of capillary-mediated signaling
during NVC. The Kir channel can act as an “on–off” switch in
cECs to hyperpolarize the cell membrane as the interstitial K+
increases. This enables capillaries to sense K+ released by neuronal activity and initiate retrograde hyperpolarizing signaling
toward upstream feeding arteries. Model analysis consolidates
experimental data in isolated cECs with integrated responses in
capillary networks and shows that the evoked arteriolar hyperpolarization cannot be explained by a passive electrical spread
from the stimulated capillary segment to the PA, suggesting an
intrinsic amplification mechanism. We propose that robust amplification is possible under conditions that enable an AP-like
response in the microvascular network. Simulations in reconstructed microvascular networks show how such a mechanism
can provide a physiologically relevant spread of electrical signaling. Stimulation of cECs within a region can promote a robust
hyperpolarization of the local capillary network, in a binary on/
off fashion, and the activity in different regions can be integrated
to produce graded vasodilatory responses in the upstream
feeding arterioles. Higher Kir densities will increase the sensitivity of the system and could allow small stimulatory signals to
regeneratively propagate over significant distances along the
microcirculatory network. A Kir density gradient could restrict
this conduction and preferentially direct the signal toward upstream feeding vessels, thus better matching increases in blood
supply to regions of activity. Previous experimental observations
suggest a role for the Kir channel as a sensor of neuronal activity
and controller of retrograde signaling in the cerebral vasculature.
In this study, we outline plausible mechanisms underlying Kirmediated responses and paradigms for electrical conduction in
the cerebral microcirculation. Further experimentation is needed
to investigate the contribution and biophysical limits of the
proposed mechanisms in endothelium-mediated NVC. New
quantitative data will enhance model development, which in turn
will provide an integrated view and a comprehensive understanding of CBF control at the microscale.
Methods
Minimal Model of Single cEC. A minimal model of cEC electrophysiology
(model I) comprises an explicit description for the whole-cell Kir current (IKir),
while all other transmembrane currents are lumped into a nonspecific linear
background current (Ibg) (Eqs. 1–3). Model parameters (Cm, GKir, Gbg, and
Ebg) were determined from patch data in freshly isolated mouse cerebral
cECs (Fig. 2F). GKir was estimated by fitting current–voltage data at Vm values
negative to the EK and Gbg by fitting current data at positive Vm values.
Conductances were corrected for leak currents and Ebg was determined from
the cEC resting Vm (−30 mV). The slope factor, k, and half-maximal inactivation voltage, V0.5, account for the level of inward rectification and
determine the magnitude and shape of the outward Kir current. Experimental data show that V0.5 drifts with EK, as [K+
]o changes (i.e., V0.5 = EK +
ΔVKir) (51, 52). Reported values for the voltage offset, ΔVKir, vary significantly in the literature and estimates include both negative and positive
values (SI Appendix, Supplementary Information Text). The value assumed as
control in this study provides sufficient outward current for reproducing
experimentally observed K+
-mediated responses.
Stochastic TRPV4 Model. In model II, we separate the TRPV4 current (ITRPV4)
from the lumped background current in model I to examine the contribution
of stochastic TRPV4 currents in the dynamics of cEC Vm. Model II accounts for
the activity of TRPV4 channels and the resultant transient depolarizing
current with bursting kinetics as characterized in mouse cECs (25). cECs show
infrequent single-channel openings with a whole-cell open probability of
NPo ≈ 0.04 at rest (25). We simulate the TRPV4 using a three-state discretetime Markov chain model (36, 53). More specifically, we assume that the
TRPV4 channel can reside in any of the following three states: 1) blocked (B,
intraburst short-closed state), 2) open (O), and 3) shut (S, interburst longclosed state), using the following mechanism:
B
k2
⇄
k1
O
k3
⇄
k4
S,
where k1 through k4 indicate the transition rates from one state to the other
Moshkforoush et al. PNAS | July 14, 2020 | vol. 117 | no. 28 | 16635
PHYSIOLOGY
Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by Johns Hopkins University on March 11, 2022 from IP address 128.220.8.15.
and quantities 1/(k3 + k1), 1/k2, 1/k4, and (1 + k1/k2)/k3 determine the mean
open time, mean blocked time, mean shut time, and burst length, respectively (36). Experimental recordings of single cEC TRPV4 openings in ref.
25 show bursts of stochastic TRPV4 openings with a mean open time (∼90
ms), a mean blocked time (∼33 ms), a mean shut time (∼4 min), and a mean
burst duration (∼20 s), from which the transition rates can be estimated. The
above mechanism results in the following transition rate matrix (Q) (36):
Q =
−( ) k3 + k1 k1 k3
k2 −k2 0
k4 0 −k4
⎡⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣
⎤⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦.
The state transition probability matrix (T) is the matrix exponential of the Q
matrix (53). Here, we used the built-in MATLAB discrete-time Markov chain
(dtmc) function to generate temporal traces of TRPV4 openings in each cEC,
with a time increment of 0.1 ms. The Na+
, K+
, and Ca2+ currents through an
open TRPV4 channel are modeled via a Goldman–Hodgkin–Katz equation
with the general form
ITRPV4,S( ) t, Vm, Si = PTRPV4,S
z2
s F2
RT Vm
Si − S0e
−zsVmF
RT
1 − e
−zsVm F
RT
, [4]
where ITRPV4,S is the current carried by each cation S (i.e., Ca2+, K+
, and Na+
),
Si is the intracellular and S0 the extracellular concentration of S, zs is the
valence of the ion, F is the Faraday constant, R is the universal gas constant, T
is the temperature in Kelvin, and PTRPV4,S is the ionic permeability [PTRPV4,Ca =
10−7 cm/s and PTRPV4,Ca:PTRPV4,K:PTRPV4,Na = 7.1:1.4:1 (36), which provides a
single channel conductance of 92 pS, in line with our prior estimate (25)].
The time-dependent net current [ITRPV4(t)] is the sum of the currents carried
by each ion through an open TRPV4 channel, multiplied by the number of
open channels, N(t), that is, ITRPV4( )t = N t( )∑
S
ITRPV4,S.
Modulation of Kir and TRPV4 Currents by PIP2. Stretch and putative NVC
mediators, including PGE2, activate GqPCR-dependent pathways that result
in the hydrolysis of plasma membrane PIP2 into diacylglycerol and inositol
1,4,5-trisphosphate. We have demonstrated that depletion of PIP2 gradually
inhibits the Kir channels and conversely increases the activity of TRPV4
channels with time constants on the order of minutes (25, 34). In simulations
performed in Fig. 4E, we have incorporated the effect of the dynamic regulation of Kir and TRPV4 through an exponential decrease in IKir, and an
exponential increase in ITRPV4, with their respective time constants upon K+
stimulation.
Multicellular Models of Microvascular Networks. cECs are coupled through
incorporation of gap junctions to construct multicellular capillary networks.
In simulations of Fig. 3, a capillary segment of serially connected cECs is
examined. In simulations performed in Figs. 3–7, cECs are connected such
that the resultant geometry approximates the isolated ex vivo preparations
in Fig. 4 and in ref. 22 or matches larger reconstructed microvascular networks adapted from ref. 26. The procedure used for large network simulations was as follows. 1) Vectorized data for vessel strands between
bifurcation points, discretized in smaller segments, were obtained from ref.
26. Data provided length, radius, and connectivity information for each
segment. 2) Each strand was resegmented to approximately match the average EC length in capillaries (20 μm) and parenchymal and pial vessels (33
μm). A weighting factor (representing number of cells per segment) was
further estimated to scale conductances and gap junctional resistances in
each segment and account for length variability in our segmentation. 3) An
in-house algorithm was developed to extract the adjacency matrix from the
data, indicating segment to segment connectivity. 4) Self-loops and stranded
components were removed from the graph network. Current flow between
adjacent cECs was estimated based on the electrical gradient and the
cEC-to-cEC coupling resistance (Rgj):
Igj,i = ∑
n
1
Rgj,i,n
( ) Vm,i − Vm,n , [5]
where n is the index of cells connected to cell(i), Igj,i is the gap junctional
current flowing from cell(i) to cell(n) with a gap junctional resistance Rgj,I,n.
Rgj has not been measured in capillaries; we thus examine Rgj values ranging
from 10 MΩ to 1 GΩ based on estimates for coupling resistances between
ECs in arteries and the axial cytoplasmic resistance, as estimated based on
length and cross-sectional area (38, 39). PAs are modeled using PA EC and
SMC membrane resistivities (Rm,EC, Rm,SMC), Kir conductances (GKir,EC
GKir,SMC), and the myoendothelial gap junctional resistance (RME), as previously described (38, 54). Three ECs are coupled to three SMCs at each
longitudinal position and are assumed isopotential. For each EC–SMC pair,
we account for a total Kir conductance (GKir,PA = GKir,EC + GKir,SMC) and a
background conductance Gbg,PA as the inverse of the resting transmembrane resistance, Rm,PA. The latter is estimated from the parallel connection of Rm,EC with RME and Rm,SMC combined in series:
Rm,PA = ( ) Rm,SMC + RME Rm,EC
( ) Rm,SMC + RME + Rm,EC
. [6]
Each unit is coupled to adjacent EC–SMC units with a resistance, Rgj,PA. PVs
are modeled similarly to PAs with negligible Kir conductance. Pial arteries
and pial veins are treated the same as PAs and PVs, respectively, but with
assuming five ECs in the circumferential direction to account for the larger
diameter of these vessels compared to PAs. Boundary conditions were imposed at each vessel crossing the simulation domain. We assumed an effective resistance, equal to the input resistance of a semiinfinite cable
(i.e., Rin = ̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
RgjRm
√ , where Rgj and Rm are vessel-specific), connecting each
boundary segment to resting Vm. Thus, effectively we assume that each
boundary vessel extends to infinity. All simulations were performed in
MATLAB 2018b using ode15s, suitable for solving stiff initial value ordinary
differential equations.
Data Availability. All codes and scripts associated with this study can be
accessed on GitHub at https://github.com/ntsoukias/ (Capillary-Kir-Model).
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. We thank Mr. Asad Mirza and Dr. Jorge Riera for
valuable feedback. This study was supported by Fondation Leducq (Transatlantic Network of Excellence on the Pathogenesis of Small Vessel Disease
of the Brain) (to M.T.N.), the European Union’s Horizon 2020 Research and
Innovation Programme (Grant Agreement 666881, SVDs@target) (to M.T.N.),
an American Heart Association Postdoctoral Fellowship (17POST33650030)
(to O.F.H.) and Scientist Development Grant (17SDG33670237) (to T.A.L.),
and NIH Grants R01NS110656 and R35HL140027 (to M.T.N.) and
R01HL136636 (to F.D.) and R15HL121778 (to N.M.T.).
1. C. S. Roy, C. S. Sherrington, On the regulation of the blood-supply of the brain.
J. Physiol. 11, 85–158 (1890).
2. H. Girouard, C. Iadecola, Neurovascular coupling in the normal brain and in hypertension, stroke, and Alzheimer disease. J. Appl. Physiol. 100, 328–335 (2006).
3. M. E. Raichle, M. A. Mintun, Brain work and brain imaging. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 29,
449–476 (2006).
4. D. Attwell et al., Glial and neuronal control of brain blood flow. Nature 468, 232–243
(2010).
5. J. A. Filosa et al., Local potassium signaling couples neuronal activity to vasodilation in
the brain. Nat. Neurosci. 9, 1397–1403 (2006).
6. C. Iadecola, M. Nedergaard, Glial regulation of the cerebral microvasculature. Nat.
Neurosci. 10, 1369–1376 (2007).
7. B. Cauli et al., Cortical GABA interneurons in neurovascular coupling: Relays for
subcortical vasoactive pathways. J. Neurosci. 24, 8940–8949 (2004).
8. M. Zonta et al., Neuron-to-astrocyte signaling is central to the dynamic control of
brain microcirculation. Nat. Neurosci. 6, 43–50 (2003).
9. C. Iadecola, The neurovascular unit coming of age: A journey through neurovascular
coupling in health and disease. Neuron 96, 17–42 (2017).
10. H. Girouard et al., Astrocytic endfoot Ca2+ and BK channels determine both arteriolar
dilation and constriction. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 107, 3811–3816 (2010).
11. B. L. Lind, A. R. Brazhe, S. B. Jessen, F. C. Tan, M. J. Lauritzen, Rapid stimulus-evoked
astrocyte Ca2+ elevations and hemodynamic responses in mouse somatosensory
cortex in vivo. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 110, E4678–E4687 (2013).
12. T. Takano et al., Astrocyte-mediated control of cerebral blood flow. Nat. Neurosci. 9,
260–267 (2006).
13. D. E. Bonder, K. D. McCarthy, Astrocytic Gq-GPCR-linked IP3R-dependent Ca2+ signaling does not mediate neurovascular coupling in mouse visual cortex in vivo.
J. Neurosci. 34, 13139–13150 (2014).
14. K. Nizar et al., In vivo stimulus-induced vasodilation occurs without IP3 receptor activation and may precede astrocytic calcium increase. J. Neurosci. 33, 8411–8422
(2013).
15. W. Sun et al., Glutamate-dependent neuroglial calcium signaling differs between
young and adult brain. Science 339, 197–200 (2013).
16. A. Mishra et al., Astrocytes mediate neurovascular signaling to capillary pericytes but
not to arterioles. Nat. Neurosci. 19, 1619–1627 (2016).
17. B. R. Chen, M. G. Kozberg, M. B. Bouchard, M. A. Shaik, E. M. Hillman, A critical role
for the vascular endothelium in functional neurovascular coupling in the brain. J. Am.
Heart Assoc. 3, e000787 (2014).
18. H. Uhlirova et al., Cell type specificity of neurovascular coupling in cerebral cortex.
eLife 5, e14315 (2016).
16636 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.2000151117 Moshkforoush et al.
Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by Johns Hopkins University on March 11, 2022 from IP address 128.220.8.15.
19. K. Ballanyi, J. Doutheil, J. Brockhaus, Membrane potentials and microenvironment of
rat dorsal vagal cells in vitro during energy depletion. J. Physiol. 495, 769–784 (1996).
20. A. L. Hodgkin, A. F. Huxley, A quantitative description of membrane current and its
application to conduction and excitation in nerve. J. Physiol. 117, 500–544 (1952).
21. K. M. Dunn, M. T. Nelson, Potassium channels and neurovascular coupling. Circ. J. 74,
608–616 (2010).
22. T. A. Longden et al., Capillary K+
-sensing initiates retrograde hyperpolarization to
increase local cerebral blood flow. Nat. Neurosci. 20, 717–726 (2017).
23. C. N. Hall et al., Capillary pericytes regulate cerebral blood flow in health and disease.
Nature 508, 55–60 (2014).
24. H. S. Silva, A. Kapela, N. M. Tsoukias, A mathematical model of plasma membrane
electrophysiology and calcium dynamics in vascular endothelial cells. Am. J. Physiol.
Cell Physiol. 293, C277–C293 (2007).
25. O. F. Harraz, T. A. Longden, D. Hill-Eubanks, M. T. Nelson, PIP2 depletion promotes
TRPV4 channel activity in mouse brain capillary endothelial cells. eLife 7, e38689
(2018).
26. P. Blinder et al., The cortical angiome: An interconnected vascular network with
noncolumnar patterns of blood flow. Nat. Neurosci. 16, 889–897 (2013).
27. B. Nilius, G. Droogmans, Ion channels and their functional role in vascular endothelium. Physiol. Rev. 81, 1415–1459 (2001).
28. F. Dabertrand et al., Potassium channelopathy-like defect underlies early-stage cerebrovascular dysfunction in a genetic model of small vessel disease. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U.S.A. 112, E796–E805 (2015).
29. T. Horiuchi, H. H. Dietrich, K. Hongo, R. G. Dacey Jr., Mechanism of extracellular K+-
induced local and conducted responses in cerebral penetrating arterioles. Stroke 33,
2692–2699 (2002).
30. H. J. Knot, P. A. Zimmermann, M. T. Nelson, Extracellular K(+)-induced hyperpolarizations and dilatations of rat coronary and cerebral arteries involve inward rectifier
K(+) channels. J. Physiol. 492, 419–430 (1996).
31. G. Mehrke, U. Pohl, J. Daut, Effects of vasoactive agonists on the membrane potential
of cultured bovine aortic and Guinea-pig coronary endothelium. J. Physiol. 439,
277–299 (1991).
32. T. Voets, G. Droogmans, B. Nilius, Membrane currents and the resting membrane
potential in cultured bovine pulmonary artery endothelial cells. J. Physiol. 497, 95–107
(1996).
33. Y. Yang et al., Diverse Kir expression contributes to distinct bimodal distribution of
resting potentials and vasotone responses of arterioles. PLoS One 10, e0125266
(2015).
34. O. F. Harraz, T. A. Longden, F. Dabertrand, D. Hill-Eubanks, M. T. Nelson, Endothelial
GqPCR activity controls capillary electrical signaling and brain blood flow through
PIP2 depletion. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 115, E3569–E3577 (2018).
35. D. E. Postnov, A. Y. Neganova, O. V. Sosnovtseva, N. H. Holstein-Rathlou, J. C. Jacobsen, Conducted vasoreactivity: The dynamical point of view. Bull. Math. Biol. 77,
230–249 (2015).
36. J. Parikh, A. Kapela, N. M. Tsoukias, Stochastic model of endothelial TRPV4 calcium
sparklets: Effect of bursting and cooperativity on EDH. Biophys. J. 108, 1566–1576
(2015).
37. J. G. McCarron, W. Halpern, Impaired potassium-induced dilation in hypertensive rat
cerebral arteries does not reflect altered Na+,K(+)-ATPase dilation. Circ. Res. 67,
1035–1039 (1990).
38. A. Kapela, E. J. Behringer, S. S. Segal, N. M. Tsoukias, Biophysical properties of microvascular endothelium: Requirements for initiating and conducting electrical signals. Microcirculation 25, e12429 (2018).
39. Y. Yamamoto, K. Imaeda, H. Suzuki, Endothelium-dependent hyperpolarization and
intercellular electrical coupling in Guinea-pig mesenteric arterioles. J. Physiol. 514,
505–513 (1999).
40. R. Wessel, W. B. Kristan Jr., D. Kleinfeld, Supralinear summation of synaptic inputs by
an invertebrate neuron: Dendritic gain is mediated by an “inward rectifier” K(+)
current. J. Neurosci. 19, 5875–5888 (1999).
41. M. C. Jantzi et al., Inward rectifying potassium channels facilitate cell-to-cell communication in hamster retractor muscle feed arteries. Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circ.
Physiol. 291, H1319–H1328 (2006).
42. W. F. Jackson, Boosting the signal: Endothelial inward rectifier K+ channels. Microcirculation 24, e12319 (2017).
43. S. K. Sonkusare, T. Dalsgaard, A. D. Bonev, M. T. Nelson, Inward rectifier potassium
(Kir2.1) channels as end-stage boosters of endothelium-dependent vasodilators.
J. Physiol. 594, 3271–3285 (2016).
44. E. J. Behringer, S. S. Segal, Tuning electrical conduction along endothelial tubes of
resistance arteries through Ca(2+)-activated K(+) channels. Circ. Res. 110, 1311–1321
(2012).
45. S. S. Segal, B. R. Duling, Conduction of vasomotor responses in arterioles: A role for
cell-to-cell coupling? Am. J. Physiol. 256, H838–H845 (1989).
46. A. N. Lopatin, E. N. Makhina, C. G. Nichols, Potassium channel block by cytoplasmic
polyamines as the mechanism of intrinsic rectification. Nature 372, 366–369 (1994).
47. J. G. McCarron, W. Halpern, Potassium dilates rat cerebral arteries by two independent mechanisms. Am. J. Physiol. 259, H902–H908 (1990).
48. T. Longden et al., Neural activity drives dynamic Ca2+ signals in capillary endothelial
cells that shape local brain blood flow. FASEB J. 33, 688 (2019).
49. S. R. Robinson, E. C. Hampson, M. N. Munro, D. I. Vaney, Unidirectional coupling of
gap junctions between neuroglia. Science 262, 1072–1074 (1993).
50. M. Rackauskas et al., Gating properties of heterotypic gap junction channels formed
of connexins 40, 43, and 45. Biophys. J. 92, 1952–1965 (2007).
51. Y. Kubo, T. J. Baldwin, Y. N. Jan, L. Y. Jan, Primary structure and functional expression
of a mouse inward rectifier potassium channel. Nature 362, 127–133 (1993).
52. A. N. Lopatin, C. G. Nichols, [K+] dependence of polyamine-induced rectification in
inward rectifier potassium channels (IRK1, Kir2.1). J. Gen. Physiol. 108, 105–113 (1996).
53. D. Colquhoun, A. G. Hawkes, On the stochastic properties of single ion channels. Proc.
R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 211, 205–235 (1981).
54. A. Kapela, S. Nagaraja, N. M. Tsoukias, A mathematical model of vasoreactivity in rat
mesenteric arterioles. II. Conducted vasoreactivity. Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol.
298, H52–H65 (2010).
55. L. He et al., Single-cell RNA sequencing of mouse brain and lung vascular and vesselassociated cell types. Sci. Data 5, 180160 (2018).
Moshkforoush et al. PNAS | July 14, 2020 | vol. 117 | no. 28 | 16637
PHYSIOLOGY
Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by Johns Hopkins University on March 11, 2022 from IP address 128.220.8.15.


nature OSCIC VOLUME 20 | NUMBER 5 | MAY 2017 717
a r t l e
Neurons lack substantial energy reserves and thus rely on an ondemand system for the delivery of blood-borne nutrients. The crux of
this system is a process termed neurovascular coupling (NVC), which
translates neural activity into a rapid increase in local blood flow
(functional hyperemia) by causing dilation of penetrating (parenchymal) arterioles and surface (pial) arteries1. To serve its on-demand
function, this mechanism must be capable of fast, long-distance
transmission of vasodilator signals from deep within the cortex to
the brain’s surface2. However, how neural activity is sensed by and
transmitted from the microcirculation is not known.
It is generally accepted that NVC involves the release of vasodilator
substances from neurons and/or astrocytes, and it has been proposed
that the smooth muscle (SM) of parenchymal arterioles is a target of
such vasoactive compounds3. Parenchymal arterioles supply blood to
discrete regions of the cortex4, but their limited spatial coverage of the
brain precludes their direct communication with the vast majority of
neurons. By contrast, every neuron is in close proximity to endothelial
cells (ECs) of the extensive, interconnected network of brain capillaries5. This uniquely positions capillary ECs (cECs) to act as sensors of
local neuronal activity throughout the brain. Nonetheless, cECs have
not been viewed as active participants in NVC.
By postulating electrical coupling between brain cECs, as reported
for systemic arteriolar ECs6, it is possible to envision a mechanism
in which the continuous, interconnected capillary network acts like
a system of ‘wires’ to communicate electrical signals to upstream
parenchymal arterioles and ultimately to pial arteries. In contrast
to axonal electrical communication, which takes the form of a
propagating membrane potential depolarization, this would involve
transmission of a hyperpolarizing signal from cECs to ECs in
upstream arterioles and surface arteries. The subsequent spread of this
hyperpolarization to adjacent SM through gap junctions at myoendothelial projections7 would then hyperpolarize the SM, deactivating
voltage-dependent calcium (Ca2+) channels, diminishing Ca2+ influx
and reducing Ca2+-dependent actin–myosin cross-bridge cycling,
resulting in arteriolar dilation8.
An important molecular requirement for such signaling is an
ion channel whose activation enables regeneration of current over
long distances. K+ channels of the KIR2 family are perfectly suited
to act as EC sensors of neural activity: they are activated by external
K+, which accumulates during neural activity9, and the resultant increase in their K+ conductance can be regenerated in neighboring cells by virtue of the steep activation of these channels by
hyperpolarization10–12. Because endothelial cells have a depolarized
resting membrane potential (approximately −40 mV)13 and the K+
equilibrium potential (EK) is very negative (approximately −103 mV
in cerebrospinal fluid), increases in capillary KIR channel conductance in response to an elevation of K+ to less than ~25 mM would
cause membrane potential hyperpolarization toward the new EK.
This hyperpolarizing current would then be transmitted through
gap junctions to the adjacent cEC, activating resident KIR channels and thereby regenerating the hyperpolarizing current.
Despite the intrinsic appeal of this concept, little is known regarding
the ion channel repertoire of cECs or their role in regulating cerebral
blood flow (CBF).
Here we demonstrate that brain capillaries act as a sensory web
to coordinately and dynamically translate neural activity within the
brain parenchyma into an increase in local blood flow, establishing
brain capillaries as a central element in the NVC process.
1Department of Pharmacology, University of Vermont, Burlington, Vermont, USA. 2Institute of Cardiovascular Sciences, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK. 3These authors contributed equally to this work. Correspondence should be addressed to M.T.N. (mark.nelson@uvm.edu).
Received 20 October 2016; accepted 19 February 2017; published online 20 March 2017; doi:10.1038/nn.4533
Capillary K+-sensing initiates retrograde
hyperpolarization to increase local cerebral
blood flow
Thomas A Longden1,3, Fabrice Dabertrand1,3, Masayo Koide1, Albert L Gonzales1, Nathan R Tykocki1,
Joseph E Brayden1, David Hill-Eubanks1 & Mark T Nelson1,2
Blood flow into the brain is dynamically regulated to satisfy the changing metabolic requirements of neurons, but how this is
accomplished has remained unclear. Here we demonstrate a central role for capillary endothelial cells in sensing neural activity
and communicating it to upstream arterioles in the form of an electrical vasodilatory signal. We further demonstrate that this
signal is initiated by extracellular K+ —a byproduct of neural activity—which activates capillary endothelial cell inward-rectifier
K+ (KIR2.1) channels to produce a rapidly propagating retrograde hyperpolarization that causes upstream arteriolar dilation,
increasing blood flow into the capillary bed. Our results establish brain capillaries as an active sensory web that converts changes
in external K+ into rapid, ‘inside-out’ electrical signaling to direct blood flow to active brain regions. © 2017 Nature America, Inc., part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
718 VOLUME 20 | NUMBER 5 | MAY 2017 nature OSCIC
a r t l e
RESULTS
Brain cECs express KIR2 channels: functional K+ sensors
Using a mechanical and enzymatic dissociation approach, we acutely
isolated mouse brain cECs for electrophysiological analyses of their
ion channel profile (Fig. 1a). To facilitate detection of KIR channels,
we raised external [K+]o to 60 mM and measured whole-cell currents in response to 200-ms voltage ramps from −140 to +50 mV.
Pronounced inward currents were detected at potentials negative to
the K+ equilibrium potential (EK; −23 mV), whereas at potentials
positive to EK the current rectified dramatically (Fig. 1b). Barium
(Ba2+), a selective pore-blocker of KIR2 channels at concentrations
less than 100 µM10, eliminated this current (Fig. 1b). Accordingly,
Ba2+-sensitive traces revealed a current signature characteristic of the
strong inward-rectifier KIR2 channel family10,14 (Fig. 1c).
Functional KIR2 channels are homo- or heterotetrameric assemblies
of KIR2.1–2.3 subunits15. In cerebral circulation, the KIR2.1 subunit
(encoded by the Kcnj2 gene) is an essential component of native SM
KIR channels16. To test whether this is also true for cECs, we used a
Cre–loxP strategy to generate an EC-specific KIR2.1-knockout (EC
KIR2.1−/−) mouse17,18 and examined its cEC KIR current properties.
In contrast to cells from wild-type (WT) mice, all of which displayed
KIR currents, none of the examined cECs from EC KIR2.1−/− mice
possessed Ba2+-sensitive currents (Fig. 1d–f). A quantitative reverse
transcription-PCR (RT-qPCR) analysis confirmed that Kcnj2 gene
transcripts were dramatically reduced in brain cECs from these mice
(Supplementary Fig. 1). We also found that KIR currents in pial artery
SM cells (Supplementary Fig. 2) were unchanged compared with
those in WT mice, confirming EC-specific KIR knockout. Additional
control experiments showed that cEC KIR currents were not disrupted
by the presence of loxP sites flanking the Kcnj2 gene (KIR2.1fl/fl mice)
or by Cre recombinase expression in the endothelium (Tek-Cre mice;
Supplementary Table 1). These data indicate that KIR2.1 is a critical
component of functional KIR channels in brain cECs and establish the
validity of our EC KIR2.1−/− mouse model.
Ca2+-activated SK and IK channels are not expressed in
brain cECs
Without exception, ECs in all arteries and arterioles studied to date
possess small- and intermediate-conductance Ca2+-activated K+
channels (SK and IK, respectively)19, which transduce changes in
intracellular Ca2+ into membrane hyperpolarization. Contrary to
expectations, we found no evidence for either of these channels in
cECs. With 300 nM intracellular Ca2+ ([Ca2+]i) in the patch pipette,
a saturating concentration (1 µM) of the synthetic, selective SK- and
IK-channel agonist NS309 (EC50 ≈ 10 nM)20 did not affect cEC currents (Fig. 1g) but did evoke robust SK and IK channel activation
in pial artery ECs (Fig. 1i and Supplementary Fig. 3a). Next, we
attempted to stimulate Ca2+-sensitive currents in cECs directly by
setting the pipette (intracellular) [Ca2+] to 3 µM. This maneuver produced large K+ currents (nearly identical to those evoked by NS309)
in pial ECs (Fig. 1i and Supplementary Fig. 3b) but did not change
membrane currents in cECs (Fig. 1h,i). Dialysis of cECs with a solution designed to buffer [Ca2+]i to very low levels also had no effect on
currents (Fig. 1i). These data indicate that the cECs lack functional
SK and IK channels and, more broadly, entirely lack Ca2+-activated
ion channels in the plasma membrane.
Capillaries translate local elevations of K+ into upstream
arteriolar dilations
Expression of functional KIR2.1 channels endows cECs with the
ability to detect and respond to increases in external K+ with membrane hyperpolarization10. To test whether K+ activation of KIR
channels in cECs can dilate upstream arterioles, we developed a
novel ex vivo preparation. An extension of our well-established
approach using isolated parenchymal arterioles from mice21–23, this
capillary–parenchymal arteriole (CaPA) preparation consists of a
cannulated parenchymal arteriole segment with an intact, downstream capillary tree held in place by an overlying micropipette that
occludes and stabilizes its extremities (Fig. 2a,b). Responses of the
arteriolar segment to pressure and bath application of vasodilators
(NS309, 10 mM K+) or constrictor agonists (U46619) were the same
in both isolated parenchymal arterioles and CaPA preparations
(Supplementary Fig. 4). An important advantage of the CaPA
preparation is that it allows vasoactive agents to be directly and
selectively applied onto terminal ends of the capillaries or onto the
arteriole without producing confounding effects on other cell types
in the brain.
Using this approach, we selectively stimulated capillaries (or arterioles) with various agents and measured arteriolar diameter at two
zones ~200 µm apart (Fig. 2c). Application of 10 mM K+ to capillary extremities produced a rapid and reproducible dilation of the
upstream arteriole in both zones (Fig. 2d–f and Supplementary
Video 1). Consistent with our hypothesis, arteriolar dilation to
capillary-applied 10 mM K+ was prevented by pretreatment with
30 µM Ba2+ (Fig. 2d,f) and was eliminated in EC KIR2.1−/− mice
(Fig. 2e,f). We also tested whether upstream arterioles dilated to
lower concentrations (6–9 mM) of capillary-applied K+. These experiments revealed a threshold for activation between 6 and 7 mM K+,
followed by graded responses to concentrations between 7 and 10 mM
(Supplementary Fig. 5).
In control experiments, pressure ejection of the IK- and SK-channel
agonist NS309 (1 µM) onto capillary extremities ~280 µm distant from
Zone 1 had no effect on upstream arteriole diameter (Supplementary
Fig. 6), consistent with the lack of functional SK and IK channels
in cECs (Fig. 1g–i). As expected, delivery of NS309 through a
pipette positioned directly adjacent to the arteriole produced robust
dilation through activation of arteriolar EC SK and IK channels
(Supplementary Fig. 6)24. These observations illustrate that compounds delivered onto capillaries in this preparation did not inadvertently stimulate the upstream arteriole. Parenchymal arterioles from
EC KIR2.1−/− mice exhibited normal myogenic tone and vasodilatory
responses to direct delivery of 1 µM NS309 (Supplementary Fig. 7),
indicating that vasomotor function and endothelial communication
to the arteriolar SM remained intact despite the loss of functional EC
KIR channels. Upstream arteriole dilation to capillary-applied K+ was
also retained in KIR2.1fl/fl mice and Tek-Cre mice (Supplementary
Table 1), confirming that the absence of K+-induced upstream arteriolar dilation was not an artifactual consequence of the presence of
loxP-flanked KIR2.1 or Tek-Cre cassettes.
Elevation of K+ around capillaries evokes retrograde electrical
signaling to the SM of upstream arterioles
Activation of K+ channels in parenchymal arteriole ECs generates
hyperpolarization that is transferred to the SM via myoendothelial
gap junctions24. To test the hypothesis that K+-mediated dilation in
our CaPA preparation reflected the propagation of a hyperpolarizing
signal from capillaries, we measured the SM cell membrane potential
at Zone 2, ~500 µm from the site of capillary stimulation (Fig. 2c).
Application of 10 mM K+ onto capillaries caused a reversible
−23.2 ± 1.8 mV hyperpolarization with an onset latency of 0.24 ± 0.03 s
(Fig. 2c,g,h). Previous analyses of membrane potential–diameter
relationships in pial arteries and parenchymal arterioles25,26 indicate
© 2017 Nature America, Inc., part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
nature OSCIC VOLUME 20 | NUMBER 5 | MAY 2017 719
a r t l e
that membrane potential hyperpolarization to about −56 mV should
cause near maximal dilation—exactly as we observed (Fig. 2e–h).
Collectively, the brief latency to hyperpolarization, which is compatible with electrical transmission, and control experiments showing
that capillary-applied agents did not inadvertently come in direct
contact with the upstream arteriolar segment (Supplementary
Fig. 6) compel the conclusion that brain cECs are electrically coupled,
as supported by previous studies on peripheral cECs6. This conclusion is further buttressed by the observation that responses to capillary-applied agents were lost if the physical integrity of the CaPA
preparation was disrupted by severing the capillary segment at the
arteriole junction (Supplementary Fig. 8). Therefore, our data support the concept that brain capillary KIR channels act as K+ sensors
to initiate a retrograde hyperpolarization that is rapidly transmitted
through the endothelium to upstream parenchymal arteriolar SM to
cause vasodilation.
In contrast to 10 mM K+, neither 25 nor 60 mM K+ caused a sustained upstream dilation (Fig. 2i,j), indicating that K+ concentrations
>25 mM did not cause membrane potential hyperpolarization10,26.
Since direct application of K+ > 25 mM causes sustained membrane
potential depolarization and constriction of cerebral arteries21,26,27,
the absence of a constrictor response to 25 or 60 mM K+ further
confirmed that substances pressure-ejected onto capillaries did not
inadvertently stimulate the upstream arteriole and indicates that
capillaries lack the ion channels required to generate regenerative
depolarizing currents. Collectively, these results imply that retrograde
vasodilatory signaling is short-circuited when external K+ is substantially elevated, as occurs in certain pathological settings, such as
cortical spreading depression and ischemia28.
Raising K+ around capillaries in vivo evokes upstream
arteriolar dilation and capillary hyperemia
To extend these observations in vivo, we tested whether capillary
KIR-channel-mediated retrograde electrical communication dilates
upstream arterioles to deliver more blood into the capillary bed. We
stimulated brain capillary segments in situ with K+ and recorded either
upstream arteriolar diameter or capillary red blood cell (RBC) flux and
velocity through a cranial window using two-photon laser-scanning
microscopy (Fig. 3a). To visualize the arteriolar–capillary network
in vivo (Fig. 3b) and enable contrast imaging of RBCs, we introduced
fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)-labeled dextran into the circulation of anesthetized mice. We then positioned a pipette containing
–140
+50
–10
Ba2+-sensitive current
a
c
Homogenization,
filtration Digestion, trituration
b
3 µM [Ca2+]
i
, 6 mM [K+
]
o
g
300 nM [Ca2+]
i
, 6 mM [K+
]
o
+ 1 µM NS309
Ba2+-sensitive
current density
(pA/pF)
WT KIR2.1–/–
KIR 2.1–/–, 60 mM [K+
]
o
+ 100 µM Ba2+
h
d
e
25 ms
25 pA
Ba2+-sensitive current
f i
3 µM [Ca2+] 1 µM NS309 i
Current density
(pA/pF)
cEC pEC cEC pEC cEC
n.s.
10
50
30
0
–5
–15
–20 –10
60 mM [K+
]
o
+ 100 µM Ba2+
EC
0 [Ca2+]
i –25
***
* ** 5
10 µm
Figure 1 Capillary ECs possess functional KIR channels but lack SK and IK channels. (a) Overview of cell isolation. Left to right: two brain slices were
homogenized and then filtered to yield branching capillaries. Extracellular matrix was enzymatically removed and capillaries were triturated to yield
single cells. Scale bar applies to all micrographs. (b) With 60 mM [K+]o to increase KIR conductance, a 200-ms voltage ramp from −140 to +50 mV
(lower inset) generated whole-cell currents (black trace) with a large inward component at hyperpolarized potentials. Superfusion of 100 µM Ba2+ (red
trace) eliminated evoked currents. (c) Subtracted 100 µM Ba2+-sensitive currents reveal a classic strongly rectifying K+ current. (d) 100 µM Ba2+ (blue)
was without effect on capillary ECs from EC KIR2.1−/− mice. (e) Subtracted 100 µM Ba2+-sensitive current from the KIR2.1−/− capillary EC in d.
(f) Comparison of Ba2+-sensitive capillary EC current density at −140 mV in WT C57BL/6 mice (n = 8 cells total, one each from 8 mice) and
EC KIR2.1−/− (n = 7 cells from 7 mice) mice (***P = 0.0005, t13 = 4.587, unpaired Student’s t-test). (g) With 6 mM [K+]o and 300 nM [Ca2+]i, 1 µM
NS309 had no effect on capillary EC currents. (h) Dialyzing with 3 µM Ca2+ did not affect membrane currents. (i) Summary data at 0 mV. NS309
(1 µM) had no effect on cECs (n = 5 cells, 3 mice) but evoked large currents in control pial ECs (pEC; n = 6 cells, 4 mice; *P = 0.0253, t9 = 2.678,
unpaired Student’s t-test). Currents were absent in cECs dialyzed with 3 µM [Ca2+]i (n = 7 cells, 2 mice), in contrast to pECs, which developed
prominent K+ currents upon dialysis of 3 µM Ca2+ (n = 5 cells, 4 mice; **P = 0.0011, t10 = 4.548, unpaired Student’s t-test). Dialysis with a solution
containing 0 Ca2+ and 5 mM EGTA had no effect on cEC currents compared with cells dialyzed with 300 nM or 3 µM Ca2+ (n = 5 cells from 2 mice;
P = 0.251, F2,14 = 1.528, one-way ANOVA; n.s., nonsignificant). All error bars represent s.e.m. © 2017 Nature America, Inc., part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
720 VOLUME 20 | NUMBER 5 | MAY 2017 nature OSCIC
a r t l e
30 s5 µm
Zone 1
Zone 2
10 10 25 25 25 60 60
–20
0
20
40
60
Z1 Z2 Z1 Z2 Z1 Z2
i j
–60
–50
–40
–30
–20
–10
0
10
Arteriolar myocyte
membrane potential (mV)
[K+
]
o applied to capillaries (mM)
g
10 mM [K+
]
o
applied to
capillaries
Arteriole
diameter (µm)
15
20
30
e
25
f
10 s
WT
EC KIR2.1–/–
–60
–40
–20
Arteriolar
membrane
potential (mV)
Base 10K
h10 mM [K+
]
oinduced
∆ baseline (%)
WT
WT+Ba2+ KIR2.1–/–
c Capillary stimulation
Zone 1
Zone 2 10 µm
d
Ba2+ (bath) Zone 1
Zone 2
10 mM [K+
]
o applied to capillaries
1 min
5 µm
0
20
40
60
80 ***
***
∆ baseline (%)
10 mM [K+
]
o
25 mM [K+
]
o
60 mM [K+
]
o
T0
T0 + 30 min
10 µm
Sealed
Pressurized
capillaries
arteriole
Pipette
Cannula
a b
Middle cerebral artery
Cannula
Lectin
Acta2-mCherry
270 µm
Capillary
Arteriole
Terminal
arteriole
Cortex
Figure 2 Application of K+ to capillaries causes rapid upstream parenchymal arteriole dilation ex vivo. (a) Left: CaPA preparations were obtained from the
middle cerebral artery region. Right: typical CaPA preparation from an Acta2 GCaMP5-mCherry mouse (see Online Methods), showing SM (red) giving way to
branching capillaries (lectin; green). Each CaPA preparation consists of an arteriole segment (320 ± 14 µm long, n = 16) and a capillary tree composed of one
first-order branch (168 ± 12 µm long) with an average of 4 ± 1 branches (100 ± 8 µm long). (b) Constriction of the arteriole to 40 mmHg in a CaPA preparation.
Upper black arrow indicates the pipette used to seal the ends of the capillaries. Lower black arrow indicates the cannula used to apply intravascular pressure.
(c) Pipette position for capillary stimulation by pressure ejection. Black arrow indicates the tip of the pipette. Diameter was simultaneously recorded in two
zones (boxes). The average distance from the capillary stimulation site to Zone 1 was 226 ± 19 µm. (d) Arteriolar diameter at Zone 1 and Zone 2 in a CaPA
preparation. Application of 10 mM K+ (5 psi) to capillaries produced rapid upstream arteriolar dilation, which was blocked by 30 µM Ba2+. (e) Expanded trace
showing parenchymal arteriole dilation at Zone 2 in response to capillary stimulation with 10 mM K+ for 18 s in preparations from WT C57BL/6 (black trace)
and EC KIR2.1−/− (blue trace) mice. (f) Summary data showing diameter changes in Zone 2 induced by 10 mM K+ applied directly onto capillaries in WT
preparations (n = 6 preparations, 6 mice) before and after 30 µM Ba2+ and in EC KIR2.1−/− preparations (n = 5 preparations, 5 mice; ***P < 0.0001,
F2,14 = 154.8, one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s multiple comparisons test). (g) Membrane potential of SM cells at Zone 2 in a pressurized (40 mmHg)
arteriolar segment during application of 10 mM K+ onto capillaries. (h) Summary data showing membrane potential before and after application of 10 mM
K+ for 18 s to capillaries (n = 5 preparations, 5 mice; ***P = 0.0002, t4 = 12.94, paired Student’s t-test). (i) Effects of capillary application of 10, 25 and
60 mM external K+ on arteriolar diameter at Zone 1 and Zone 2. (j) Summary data showing diameter changes in Zone 1 and Zone 2 induced by 10, 25, and
60 mM K+ applied directly onto capillaries. Responses to 25 and 60 mM K+ compared to baseline diameter and between Zone 1 and Zone 2 were not
significantly different (n = 6 preparations, 6 mice; baseline vs. 25 mM K+: P = 0.1128, t5 = 1.921; baseline vs. 60 mM K+: P = 0.4984, t5 = 0.7296;
Zone 1 vs. Zone 2: P = 0.3908, t5 = 0.9390 at 25 mM K+ and P = 0.2580, t5 = 1.276 at 60 mM K+; paired Student’s t-test). All error bars represent s.e.m. © 2017 Nature America, Inc., part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
nature OSCIC VOLUME 20 | NUMBER 5 | MAY 2017 721
a r t l e
WT + 100 µM Ba2+
+–
Baseline
2 µm
Pressure ejection +1 s +3 s
10 mM K+
300 ms
10 mM K+
WT
Flux (cells per s)
Flux (cells per s)
5
10
15
20
25
Flux (cells per s)
0
30
40
50
20
10
e f
+–
300 *
120
60
30
0
∆ Flux to 10 mM K+ (%)
WT
EC KIR2.1–/–
Capillary
Pipette
RBC
c
100 µm
–70 –140 –210 –350
b
0 µm
Feed arteriole
d
Pipette
Baseline
10 mM K+
Baseline
1 s
13 µm 17 µm
RBC
1 s
Plasma
Plasma
Ba2+
KIR2.1–/–
a
Capillary 10 mM K+
 + TRITC Plasma RBC
10 µm
–3 0 9
Time (s)
3 12 15 18
5
10
15
20
25
–3 0 6 9 12 15 18
Time (s)
n.s.
g
10 mM K+ 10 mM K+
+–
10 mM K+
h EC KIR2.1–/– i
n.s.
WT j
60
70
Flux (cells per s)
0
30
40
50
20
10
60
70
Flux (cells per s)
0
40
80
20
60
100
–280
90
270
–30
Pial artery
Pipette
Cranial window
Skull
Cortex
Capillaries
3 6
10 mM K+
300 ms
Figure 3 K+ causes capillary hyperemia in vivo through KIR2.1 channel activation. (a) Experimental scheme. Mice were injected with FITC-dextran
and then equipped with a cranial window through which the cerebral circulation was visualized using two-photon laser-scanning microscopy (2PLSM).
(b) Depth-coded micrograph of an area of the cortical vasculature. Capillaries downstream of penetrating parenchymal arterioles were identified for
further analysis. (c) A pipette containing aCSF with 3 or 10 mM K+ plus tetramethylrhodamine isothiocyanate (TRITC)-dextran was introduced next to
a capillary, which was then line-scanned at 5 kHz during local pressure ejection of the pipette contents. (d) Micrographs depicting (left to right) the
evolution of TRITC diffusion (red) after pressure ejection of 10 mM K+ (200 ms, 4 psi) onto a capillary (green). The brevity and low pressure of the
ejection conditions ensured that K+ remained local. (e) Left: baseline and peak distance–time plots of capillary line scans showing hyperemia to the
ejection of 10 mM K+ onto a capillary. RBCs passing through the line-scanned capillary appear as black shadows against green fluorescent plasma.
Right: typical experimental time-course for a WT mouse showing RBC flux binned at 1-s intervals before and after pressure ejection of 10 mM K+
(300 ms, 8 psi; purple arrow) onto a capillary, demonstrating hyperemia to K+ delivery. (f) Left: line scan plots for an experiment in which 10 mM K+
was pressure ejected onto a capillary in an EC KIR2.1−/− mouse, illustrating an absence of hyperemia to this maneuver. Right: typical flux-time trace
for an EC KIR2.1−/− mouse capillary. Pressure ejection of 10 mM K+ (300 ms, 8 psi; purple arrow) did not evoke hyperemia. (g) Summary RBC flux
responses to 10 mM K+ in WT mice. K+ delivery caused significant hyperemia (n = 11 paired experiments, 11 mice; **P = 0.0038, t10 = 3.75, paired
Student’s t-test). (h) Summary data for EC KIR2.1−/− mice (n = 9 paired experiments, 9 mice); 10 mM K+ did not evoke hyperemia (P = 0.8265,
t8 = 0.2265, paired Student’s t-test). (i) Ba2+ (100 µM) applied to the cranial surface inhibited capillary hyperemia to 10 mM K+ (n = 6 paired
experiments, 6 mice; P > 0.99, t5 = 0, paired Student’s t-test); n.s., nonsignificant. (j) Change in RBC flux expressed as a percentage of baseline
for each experimental group (*P = 0.016, experimental groups vs. WT, F2,23 = 4.974; one-way ANOVA with Holm-Sidak’s multiple comparison test).
All error bars represent s.e.m.
© 2017 Nature America, Inc., part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
722 VOLUME 20 | NUMBER 5 | MAY 2017 nature OSCIC
a r t l e
10 mM K+ adjacent to a postarteriolar capillary (130 ± 15 µm
downstream of the feed arteriole; n = 22; Fig. 3c) and raised local
K+ by pressure ejection of 10 mM K+ for 200–300 ms (Fig. 3d and
Supplementary Video 2). This maneuver caused a rapid (latency
of 3.8 ± 0.9 s; n = 11) and robust increase in RBC flux (73% ± 23%;
n = 11; Fig. 3e,g,j) and velocity (Supplementary Fig. 9a,e). These
effects were not observed following ejection of a 3 mM K+ solution (Supplementary Fig. 10), precluding a mechanical mechanism. Inhibiting neuronal activity by cranial-surface application
of tetrodotoxin (3 µM), a voltage-dependent Na+ channel blocker,
did not attenuate K+-induced increases in RBC flux or velocity
(Supplementary Fig. 11), also ruling out a coupling mechanism
involving direct neuronal stimulation. The specific involvement of
EC KIR channels in these in vivo actions of applied K+ was examined
by measuring hyperemic responses to K+ in the presence of Ba2+ and
in EC KIR2.1−/− mice. Application of 10 mM K+ onto capillaries of
EC KIR2.1−/− mice failed to increase RBC flux or velocity (Fig. 3f,h,j
and Supplementary Fig. 9b,f), supporting the central role of EC
KIR2.1 channels in K+-induced retrograde signaling and capillary
hyperemia. Furthermore, 10 mM K+ did not change capillary RBC
velocity or flux in WT mice in the presence of 100 µM Ba2+ (Fig. 3i,j
and Supplementary Fig. 9c,d,g). Together, these data indicate that
increases in external K+ drive KIR-channel-mediated retrograde capillary-to-arteriole communication in vivo through activation of EC
KIR2.1 channels (Fig. 3j).
To confirm that hyperemic responses to capillary application of
10 mM K+ result from upstream arteriole dilation, we assessed the
diameters of feed arterioles in response to capillary stimulation
with K+. Consistent with our blood flow results, delivery of K+ onto
a capillary invariably increased upstream feed arteriole diameter
(32.9% ± 4.4%; n = 8; Fig. 4a–d and Supplementary Video 3) but
had no effect on the diameter of the stimulated capillary (Fig. 4e).
Endothelial KIR2.1 channels are the primary actuators of K+
evoked increases in CBF and are critical for functional hyperemia
To examine the role of EC KIR2.1 channels in K+-evoked cerebral
hyperemia in vivo, we recorded CBF in a volume of the somatosensory cortex through a cranial window using laser Doppler flowmetry. Application of 15 mM K+ to the cranial surface caused a robust
increase in cortical CBF that was strongly inhibited (by 80%) by
100 µM Ba2+ in WT mice and greatly diminished (by 49%) in EC
KIR2.1−/− mice, supporting the conclusion that EC KIR2.1 channels
have a major role in K+-induced hyperemia (Fig. 5a). To confirm
that this KIR2.1 channel-dependent mechanism is engaged during functional hyperemia—as implied by previous reports that
Ba2+ substantially reduces neural activity-evoked increases in
CBF27,29–31—we measured CBF responses evoked by whisker stimulation. Whisker stimulation-evoked CBF increases were markedly
blunted (by 49%) in EC KIR2.1−/− mice (Fig. 5b,c) and following
application of 100 µM Ba2+ (by 80%) in WT mice (Fig. 5c), consistent with cEC KIR2.1 channels playing an essential role in functional
hyperemia. The residual Ba2+-sensitive component of K+-induced
(Fig. 5a) and whisker stimulation-induced (Fig. 5c) functional
hyperemia in EC KIR2.1−/− mice is likely attributable to the direct
engagement of SM KIR2.1 channels by topically applied K+ and
by K+ released from astrocytic endfeet during NVC, respectively,
+–
c
Upstream arteriole
diameter (µm)
0
12 *
*
*
8
4
d
10 s1 µm 10 mM K+ Target capillary diameter (µm)
e
n.s.
0
12
8
4
10 mM K+ +–
10 mM K+
10 µm a b
Penetrating
arteriole
Pipette
Baseline 10 mM K+
8.1 µm
d = 6.8 µm
Baseline
Peak
Pre-capillary
arteriole
1° capillary
2° capillary
Arteriole lumen
capillary lumen d
Ejected K+
Figure 4 Application of 10 mM K+ to capillaries causes upstream arteriolar dilation in vivo. (a) Left: micrograph illustrating pipette placement adjacent
to a second-order capillary for in vivo monitoring of the diameter of the upstream feed arteriole (boxed). White dashed lines indicate that capillaries
are connected into a single tree despite deviating from the imaging plane. Left: the same experiment after pressure ejection of 10 mM K+ and TRITC
(red) around the capillary. Note the dilation in the feed arteriole (boxed). (b) Magnification of the boxed areas around the feed arteriole in a, illustrating
the magnitude of dilation evoked by capillary stimulation with 10 mM K+. (c) Traces illustrating the luminal diameter of a precapillary arteriole (green)
and the stimulated capillary (gray) before and after stimulation with 10 mM K+. Delivery of K+ produced a robust dilation in the arteriole but not the
capillary. (d) Summary data showing arteriole diameter before and after capillary application of 10 mM K+, which produced significant upstream
arteriole dilation (n = 8 paired experiments, 7 mice; ***P < 0.0001, t7 = 10.86, paired Student’s t-test). (e) Summary data showing target capillary
diameter before and after capillary application of 10 mM K+, which had no effect (n = 18 capillaries, 7 mice, P = 0.6014, t17 = 0.5324, paired
Student’s t-test). All error bars represent s.e.m.; n.s., nonsignificant.
© 2017 Nature America, Inc., part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
nature OSCIC VOLUME 20 | NUMBER 5 | MAY 2017 723
a r t l e
as previously demonstrated12,27. However, Ba2+ could also have direct
effects on neural activity. To explore this possibility, we assessed local
field potentials in the barrel cortex, evoked by whisker stimulation
before and after 100 µM Ba2+ superfusion. Whisker stimulation
elicited clear local field potential oscillations of 5.0 ± 0.1 Hz both
with and without Ba2+ (Supplementary Fig. 12), consistent with
the conclusion that, under these conditions, neural activity in
response to whisker stimulation was maintained in the presence
of Ba2+. Notably, a fivefold higher concentration of Ba2+ than that
used here also has no effect on sensory-evoked neural activity32,
reinforcing our conclusion that the vasculature was the major
target of Ba2+ in our in vivo experiments. As expected, hyperemic responses were preserved in KIR2.1fl/fl and Tek-Cre controls
(Supplementary Table 1).
DISCUSSION
A single microliter of the cortex contains almost one meter of total
vascular length33, with capillaries vastly outdistancing arterioles
and venules in their reach. The number of cECs in the brain closely
matches that of neurons34, and each brain capillary is <15 µm from
the nearest neuronal cell body35. This anatomical arrangement invites
the hypothesis that long-range conducted signaling from capillaries to upstream arterioles would be an efficient way to direct blood
flow to the deep microcirculation in response to neuronal activity.
Our findings provide strong experimental evidence in support of
this concept, indicating that brain capillary networks function as a
sensory web to relay information about neuronal activity to upstream
arterioles and pial arteries. Specifically, our data support a mechanism in which activation of cEC KIR2.1 channels by K+ released during neural activity initiates a rapidly propagating hyperpolarization,
conceptualized as an ‘inverse action potential’, that drives upstream
arteriolar dilation, promoting rapid hyperemia at the site of the K+
increase (Supplementary Fig. 13). Because K+ ions are released
during each neuronal action potential, this mechanism provides a
means for tightly coupling CBF to the rhythms of neuronal firing
within the brain and places capillaries at center stage in the momentto-moment control of CBF.
Brain cECs are phenotypically distinct from their arteriolar
counterparts
To date, there has been a paucity of information regarding which ion
channels are expressed in brain cECs and how they affect capillary
function. Our characterization of the ion channel repertoire of ECs in
brain capillaries addresses this deficit and provides important insights
into both similarities and differences between these ECs and those
in other vascular beds.
Critically for our functional model, we detected Kcnj2 transcripts
in freshly isolated mouse brain capillary ECs and recorded strongly
rectifying KIR currents from these cells that were sensitive to 100 µM
Ba2+, a concentration relatively selective for KIR2 channels. Notably,
these currents were absent in EC KIR2.1−/− mice. These observations
firmly establish that brain cECs possess functional KIR2 channels
and demonstrate that the KIR2.1 subunit is an essential component
of this channel complex.
To our surprise, we found no evidence for Ca2+-activated SK or IK
channels in cECs. This observation stands in stark contrast with all
previously tested arteriolar ECs, which possess prominent SK and IK
currents19. This finding is notable, in part, because it illustrates that
cECs are not merely a continuation of the arteriolar endothelium
but instead are phenotypically distinct from their arteriolar counterparts. Functionally, the absence of these channels could support
optimal electrical signaling along the capillary by removing an avenue
for current leak.
Extracellular K+ drives capillary-to-arteriole electrical
communication, causing upstream dilation
Action potentials, the defining feature of neuronal activity, are composed of an upstroke mediated by influx of Na+ via voltage-dependent
Na+ channels and a repolarization phase attributable to K+ efflux
mediated by a variety of K+ channels. Our model implicitly assumes
that the activity of these latter channels underlies the increase in
extracellular K+ that triggers EC KIR2.1-dependent electrical signaling, but other sources of K+ could also contribute. Prominent among
these are astrocytes, which mediate arteriolar dilation in response
to neuronal activation by releasing K+ onto parenchymal arterioles
5 a.u
30 s
WS
WS
WT
Contralateral whisker
stimulation
Cranial
window
a
∆ CBF
to whisker stimulation (%)
0
10
20
30
40
b
– + – +
∆ CBF to 15 mM K+ (%)
0
10
20
30
40
+100 µM Ba2+ +100 µM Ba2+
WT EC KIR2.1–/–
EC KIR2.1–/–
WT EC KIR2.1–/– +– +–
c
LDF probe 50
60
*
*
*
* *
* *
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
* *
–10
50
Figure 5 EC KIR2.1 channels are essential for functional hyperemia. (a) Summary data for 15 mM K+-evoked hyperemia. Responses in WT mice were
severely attenuated by 100 µM Ba2+. Responses in EC KIR2.1−/− mice were significantly smaller than those from WT mice and almost abrogated by
100 µM Ba2+ (WT, n = 6 mice; EC KIR2.1−/−, n = 5 mice. ****P < 0.0001, q18 = 9.033; **P = 0.0083, q18 = 5.214; *P = 0.0187, q18 = 4.676;
two-way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparisons test). (b) Left: whisker stimulation experimental scheme. Right: typical traces illustrating the
hyperemic response to whisker stimulation (WS), measured using laser Doppler flowmetry. Hyperemia in EC KIR2.1−/− mice (blue) was markedly blunted
compared with that in WT mice (black). Black dashed lines represent baseline and peak WT response for comparison. (c) Summary data for functional
hyperemia, indicating that responses in WT mice were driven by a substantial Ba2+-sensitive component, which was greatly diminished in EC KIR2.1−/−
mice (WT, n = 7 mice; EC KIR2.1−/−, n = 6 mice; ****P < 0.0001, q22 = 14.3, WT vs. Ba2+ and q22 = 8.396, WT vs. EC KIR2.1−/−; *P = 0.0238,
q22 = 4.413; two-way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparisons test). All error bars represent s.e.m. © 2017 Nature America, Inc., part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
724 VOLUME 20 | NUMBER 5 | MAY 2017 nature OSCIC
a r t l e
through large-conductance Ca2+-activated K+ (BK) channels in astrocytic endfeet, thereby activating SM KIR channels12,27. Astrocytes also
enwrap capillaries and almost completely encase the intracerebral
vasculature36, unlike neuronal processes, which terminate on the vasculature more rarely37. Thus, this mechanism offers another likely
avenue for K+ release onto capillaries, although this awaits experimental confirmation.
Our CaPA preparation provided the means to experimentally test
the ability of capillaries to rapidly transmit a propagating vasodilatory
signal in response to local increases in extracellular K+. Using this
approach, we demonstrated that restricted application of a dilating
concentration of K+ (10 mM) onto a capillary extremity caused rapid
dilation of an attached, upstream arteriolar segment with myogenic
tone. Direct evidence that this represents EC-to-SM electrical conduction was provided by experiments showing that stimulation of
capillary extremities with 10 mM K+ resulted in arteriolar SM hyperpolarization. This hyperpolarization was detectable within 240 ms of
the onset of stimulation ~500 µm distant from the stimulus site. This
translates to a hyperpolarization conduction velocity of ~2 mm/s,
a rate that is consistent with electrical transmission.
Conducted hyperpolarization implies electrical coupling between
brain cECs, as has been demonstrated in peripheral vascular beds6,38.
Electrical conduction in arterioles is enabled by the presence of gap
junctions, formed from homo- or heteromeric assemblies of connexin (Cx) proteins, between ECs, between SM cells, and between
ECs and SM at myoendothelial projections39. Notably, mRNAs for
Cx37, Cx43 and Cx45 have been detected in acutely isolated brain
ECs40, providing a potential molecular basis for the observed cell–cell
electrical coupling in brain capillaries. The fact that capillary-applied
K+ failed to evoke upstream dilation when the capillary–arteriole
connection was severed also supports the conclusion that an intact
capillary–arteriole continuum is essential for transmission and
rules out a mechanism involving the release and diffusion of other
vasoactive mediators. Our experimental findings thus imply that
the cECs form an electrically connected syncytium—analogous to a
series of wires throughout the brain—that is coupled to the overlying
SM at the arteriolar level.
K+- and KIR2.1-mediated capillary-to-arteriole communication
underlies functional hyperemia in vivo
The hyperemic effect of small elevations of extracellular K+ in the cerebral circulation has been appreciated for more than 40 years41, but
the precise cellular and molecular target of K+ in the cerebral circulation has so far eluded firm identification. Our demonstration that the
increase in CBF induced by surface application of 15 mM K+ in a cranial
window model was strongly inhibited by 100 µM Ba2+ and dramatically
reduced in EC KIR2.1−/− mice firmly establishes a KIR2.1-containing
channel as the molecular mediator of K+-induced hyperemia.
Our K+- and KIR-dependent, capillary-mediated mechanism predicts that, in vivo, increases in vessel diameter will occur first in the
most distal segment of the pial artery–parenchymal arteriole tree (i.e.,
most capillary-proximate) and spread progressively upstream to pial
arteries. Indeed, in vivo imaging studies have revealed that dilation in
response to neural activity proceeds in this manner2. These neurally
driven dilations conduct at an apparent rate of 1–2 mm/s, a speed that
is consistent with our measurements and argues for an underlying
electrical mechanism.
It is this dilation of upstream arteries and arterioles that ultimately
promotes a hyperemic response in the capillary bed where the triggering K+ signal originates. Experiments in which we extended our K+-
and KIR-mediated, capillary-based communication mechanism in vivo
were consistent with this, showing that local pressure ejection of
10 mM K+ onto a capillary segment within the cortical parenchyma
via a pipette caused dilation of the connected upstream arteriole and a
subsequent increase in RBC flux and velocity in the stimulated capillary. Notably, these responses were abrogated in the presence of 100 µM
Ba2+ and were absent in EC KIR2.1−/− mice, confirming that cEC
KIR2.1 channels are necessary for the hyperemic effect of local elevations in K+. A potential confounding issue in vivo is indirect effects
of K+ on other cell types. For example, raising K+ could depolarize
neurons and cause the release of other vasoactive factors. To control
for this possibility, we performed experiments in the presence of tetrodotoxin to block neuronal action potentials. As expected, whisker
stimulation-evoked increases in capillary flux were completely eliminated by this maneuver, but hyperemic responses to subsequent
pressure ejection of K+ onto capillaries persisted. These data further
strengthen our conclusion that the observed in vivo responses were
attributable to signaling inherent to the capillary wall and were not
the byproduct of inadvertent neuronal activation.
In a final test of the physiological significance of endothelial
KIR2.1 channels in functional hyperemia, we measured changes in
CBF induced by whisker stimulation in WT and EC KIR2.1−/− mice.
Laser Doppler flowmetry revealed that the robust increases in CBF
observed in WT mice were decreased by 50% in EC KIR2.1−/− mice.
Notably, Ba2+ eliminated all but ~20% of the hyperemic response in
WT mice and reduced the evoked response in EC KIR2.1−/− mice to
a similar level. Possible explanations for the residual Ba2+-sensitive
component in our EC KIR2.1−/− mouse include direct activation of SM
KIR2.1 channels by K+ released from adjacent astrocytic endfeet12,27
and recruitment of SM KIR2.1 channels by hyperpolarization resulting
from other signaling mediators, such as PGE2, epoxyeicosatrienoic
acids or nitric oxide3. Either of these explanations would imply that
KIR channels on SM are necessary for full manifestation of the hyperemic response to any NVC mediator, since hyperpolarization is a
necessary step in vasodilation.
The capillary sensory web in context
Whether blood flow control in response to tissue metabolic requirements originates in capillaries is a long-standing question. Indeed, we
proposed over 20 years ago that capillaries couple metabolic demand to
increases in blood flow in cardiac muscle42. More recently, Atwell and
colleagues suggested that functional hyperemia is initiated at the capillary level by pericyte relaxation mediated by neuronally derived PGE2
and reported that capillaries themselves dilate before upstream arterioles
following stimulation43. We note that, although we have not detected
capillary dilation in response to stimulation, the continuous segments
in which we measured capillary diameters lacked pericytes (based on
images obtained using codelivered tetramethylrhodamine isothiocyanate-dextran). Thus, it is possible that overlying pericytes, if present
at locations where stimuli were delivered, could regulate local capillary
diameter, a possibility consistent with certain features of the model proposed by Attwell and colleagues44. Evidence from retinal preparations
indicates that pericytes are electrically coupled to cECs44 and express
KIR channels45. Thus, it is also conceivable that pericytes could provide
input into K+- and KIR-dependent signaling by amplifying incoming
electrical signals during their relay to the upstream arteriole.
Recently, Nedergaard and colleagues46 proposed that a key early component of the hyperemic response to neuronal activity is an increase
in capillary erythrocyte velocity resulting from deformation of RBCs
in response to neuronal metabolism-induced dips in local O2 tension,
reporting that increases in RBC velocity are observed in capillaries before
they can be detected in upstream arterioles. This RBC-deformation
© 2017 Nature America, Inc., part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
nature OSCIC VOLUME 20 | NUMBER 5 | MAY 2017 725
a r t l e
model lacks a mechanism for increasing upstream arteriolar diameter,
which Hillman and colleagues have shown to be dependent on an
intact arteriolar endothelium47. This is a major strength of our K+- and
KIR-dependent electrical conduction mechanism: it provides a means
for explaining the rapid upstream dilation that is a consistently
reported feature of functional hyperemia2,46,47.
CONCLUSION
Collectively, our findings recast capillaries as a sensory web dedicated
to the rapid and fine control of microcirculatory hemodynamics in
support of fluctuating neuronal metabolic demands. In a broader context, similar mechanisms for translating local environmental changes
into capillary signals to upstream arterioles likely exist in other electrically active tissues, such as cardiac and skeletal muscle.
M
Methods, including statements of data availability and any associated
accession codes and references, are available in the online version of
the paper.
Note: Any Supplementary Information and Source Data files are available in the
online version of the paper.
Acknowledgmen
The authors gratefully acknowledge J. Barry for assistance with local field potential
recordings and analysis, and S. O’Dwyer and M. Ross for technical assistance. This
study was supported by a postdoctoral fellowship (14POST20480144 to T.A.L.) and
a scientist development grant (14SDG20150027 to M.K.) from the American Heart
Association, and grants from the United Leukodystrophy Foundation (to F.D.), the
Totman Medical Research Trust (to M.T.N.), Fondation Leducq (to M.T.N.), European
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (grant agreement No
666881, SVDs@target, to M.T.N.), and National Institutes of Health (R01-HL-136636
to F.D.; T32HL-007594 to A.L.G.; K01-DK103840 to N.R.T.; P30-GM-103498 to the
COBRE imaging facility at UVM College of Medicine; P01-HL-095488, R01-HL121706, R37-DK-053832, 7UM-HL-1207704 and R01-HL-131181 to M.T.N.).
AUTHR TRIBUTIS
T.A.L. acquired and analyzed patch clamp electrophysiology data, provided tissue
for RT-qPCR, acquired and analyzed in vivo hemodynamics and diameter data,
acquired and analyzed local field potential data, wrote the initial draft, and edited
the manuscript. F.D. developed the CaPA preparation, acquired and analyzed all
CaPA preparation data and edited the manuscript. M.K. acquired and analyzed
laser Doppler flowmetry data. A.L.G. acquired fluorescent-staining data and edited
the manuscript. N.R.T. acquired and analyzed RT-qPCR data. J.E.B. edited the
manuscript. D.H.-E. contributed significantly to the study design and edited the
manuscript. M.T.N. conceived and directed the study, and wrote and edited the
manuscript. All authors reviewed the manuscript and approved its submission.
PTI FIAIA ITRSTS
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Reprints and permissions information is available online at http://www.nature.com/
reprints/index.html.
1. Iadecola, C. & Nedergaard, M. Glial regulation of the cerebral microvasculature.
Nat. Neurosci. 10, 1369–1376 (2007).
2. Uhlirova, H. et al. Cell type specificity of neurovascular coupling in cerebral cortex.
eLife 5, e14315 (2016).
3. Attwell, D. et al. Glial and neuronal control of brain blood flow. Nature 468,
232–243 (2010).
4. Nishimura, N., Schaffer, C.B., Friedman, B., Lyden, P.D. & Kleinfeld, D. Penetrating
arterioles are a bottleneck in the perfusion of neocortex. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
104, 365–370 (2007).
5. Blinder, P. et al. The cortical angiome: an interconnected vascular network with
noncolumnar patterns of blood flow. Nat. Neurosci. 16, 889–897 (2013).
6. Beach, J.M., McGahren, E.D. & Duling, B.R. Capillaries and arterioles are electrically
coupled in hamster cheek pouch. Am. J. Physiol. 275, H1489–H1496 (1998).
7. Aydin, F., Rosenblum, W.I. & Povlishock, J.T. Myoendothelial junctions in human
brain arterioles. Stroke 22, 1592–1597 (1991).
8. Nelson, M.T., Patlak, J.B., Worley, J.F. & Standen, N.B. Calcium channels, potassium
channels, and voltage dependence of arterial smooth muscle tone. Am. J. Physiol.
259, C3–C18 (1990).
9. Ballanyi, K., Doutheil, J. & Brockhaus, J. Membrane potentials and microenvironment
of rat dorsal vagal cells in vitro during energy depletion. J. Physiol. (Lond.) 495,
769–784 (1996).
10. Longden, T.A. & Nelson, M.T. Vascular inward rectifier K+ channels as external K+
sensors in the control of cerebral blood flow. Microcirculation 22, 183–196
(2015).
11. Quayle, J.M., Nelson, M.T. & Standen, N.B. ATP-sensitive and inwardly rectifying
potassium channels in smooth muscle. Physiol. Rev. 77, 1165–1232 (1997).
12. Filosa, J.A. et al. Local potassium signaling couples neuronal activity to vasodilation
in the brain. Nat. Neurosci. 9, 1397–1403 (2006).
13. Ledoux, J. et al. Functional architecture of inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate signaling
in restricted spaces of myoendothelial projections. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 105,
9627–9632 (2008).
14. Quayle, J.M., McCarron, J.G., Brayden, J.E. & Nelson, M.T. Inward rectifier K+
currents in smooth muscle cells from rat resistance-sized cerebral arteries. Am. J.
Physiol. 265, C1363–C1370 (1993).
15. Hibino, H. et al. Inwardly rectifying potassium channels: their structure, function,
and physiological roles. Physiol. Rev. 90, 291–366 (2010).
16. Zaritsky, J.J., Eckman, D.M., Wellman, G.C., Nelson, M.T. & Schwarz, T.L. Targeted
disruption of Kir2.1 and Kir2.2 genes reveals the essential role of the inwardly
rectifying K(+) current in K(+)-mediated vasodilation. Circ. Res. 87, 160–166
(2000).
17. Ye, W. et al. The K+ channel KIR2.1 functions in tandem with proton influx to
mediate sour taste transduction. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 113, E229–E238
(2016).
18. Sonkusare, S.K., Dalsgaard, T., Bonev, A.D. & Nelson, M.T. Inward rectifier
potassium (Kir2.1) channels as end-stage boosters of endothelium-dependent
vasodilators. J. Physiol. (Lond.) 594, 3271–3285 (2016).
19. Ledoux, J., Werner, M.E., Brayden, J.E. & Nelson, M.T. Calcium-activated potassium
channels and the regulation of vascular tone. Physiology (Bethesda) 21, 69–78
(2006).
20. Strøbaek, D. et al. Activation of human IK and SK Ca2+ -activated K+ channels by
NS309 (6,7-dichloro-1H-indole-2,3-dione 3-oxime). Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1665,
1–5 (2004).
21. Dabertrand, F. et al. Potassium channelopathy-like defect underlies early-stage
cerebrovascular dysfunction in a genetic model of small vessel disease. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA 112, E796–E805 (2015).
22. Dabertrand, F. et al. Prostaglandin E2, a postulated astrocyte-derived neurovascular
coupling agent, constricts rather than dilates parenchymal arterioles. J. Cereb. Blood
Flow Metab. 33, 479–482 (2013).
23. Dabertrand, F., Nelson, M.T. & Brayden, J.E. Acidosis dilates brain parenchymal
arterioles by conversion of calcium waves to sparks to activate BK channels.
Circ. Res. 110, 285–294 (2012).
24. Hannah, R.M., Dunn, K.M., Bonev, A.D. & Nelson, M.T. Endothelial SK(Ca) and
IK(Ca) channels regulate brain parenchymal arteriolar diameter and cortical cerebral
blood flow. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 31, 1175–1186 (2011).
25. Nystoriak, M.A. et al. Fundamental increase in pressure-dependent constriction of
brain parenchymal arterioles from subarachnoid hemorrhage model rats due to
membrane depolarization. Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol. 300, H803–H812
(2011).
26. Knot, H.J., Zimmermann, P.A. & Nelson, M.T. Extracellular K(+)-induced
hyperpolarizations and dilatations of rat coronary and cerebral arteries involve inward
rectifier K(+) channels. J. Physiol. (Lond.) 492, 419–430 (1996).
27. Girouard, H. et al. Astrocytic endfoot Ca2+ and BK channels determine both arteriolar
dilation and constriction. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 107, 3811–3816 (2010).
28. Ayata, C. & Lauritzen, M. Spreading depression, spreading depolarizations, and the
cerebral vasculature. Physiol. Rev. 95, 953–993 (2015).
29. Toussay, X., Basu, K., Lacoste, B. & Hamel, E. Locus coeruleus stimulation recruits
a broad cortical neuronal network and increases cortical perfusion. J. Neurosci. 33,
3390–3401 (2013).
30. Vetri, F., Xu, H., Paisansathan, C. & Pelligrino, D.A. Impairment of neurovascular
coupling in type 1 diabetes mellitus in rats is linked to PKC modulation of BK(Ca)
and Kir channels. Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol. 302, H1274–H1284 (2012).
31. Masamoto, K. et al. Unveiling astrocytic control of cerebral blood flow with
optogenetics. Sci. Rep. 5, 11455 (2015).
32. Leithner, C. et al. Pharmacological uncoupling of activation induced increases in
CBF and CMRO2. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 30, 311–322 (2010).
33. Shih, A.Y. et al. Robust and fragile aspects of cortical blood flow in relation to the
underlying angioarchitecture. Microcirculation 22, 204–218 (2015).
34. García-Amado, M. & Prensa, L. Stereological analysis of neuron, glial and endothelial
cell numbers in the human amygdaloid complex. PLoS One 7, e38692 (2012).
35. Tsai, P.S. et al. Correlations of neuronal and microvascular densities in murine
cortex revealed by direct counting and colocalization of nuclei and vessels.
J. Neurosci. 29, 14553–14570 (2009).
36. Simard, M., Arcuino, G., Takano, T., Liu, Q.S. & Nedergaard, M. Signaling at the
gliovascular interface. J. Neurosci. 23, 9254–9262 (2003).
37. Cauli, B. et al. Cortical GABA interneurons in neurovascular coupling: relays for
subcortical vasoactive pathways. J. Neurosci. 24, 8940–8949 (2004).
38. Zhang, T., Wu, D.M., Xu, G.-Z. & Puro, D.G. The electrotonic architecture of the
retinal microvasculature: modulation by angiotensin II. J. Physiol. (Lond.) 589,
2383–2399 (2011).
39. Figueroa, X.F. & Duling, B.R. Gap junctions in the control of vascular function.
Antioxid. Redox Signal. 11, 251–266 (2009).
© 2017 Nature America, Inc., part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
726 VOLUME 20 | NUMBER 5 | MAY 2017 nature OSCIC
a r t l e
40. Zhang, Y. et al. An RNA-sequencing transcriptome and splicing database of glia,
neurons, and vascular cells of the cerebral cortex. J. Neurosci. 34, 11929–11947
(2014).
41. Kuschinsky, W., Wahl, M., Bosse, O. & Thurau, K. Perivascular potassium and pH
as determinants of local pial arterial diameter in cats. A microapplication study.
Circ. Res. 31, 240–247 (1972).
42. Daut, J., Standen, N.B. & Nelson, M.T. The role of the membrane potential of
endothelial and smooth muscle cells in the regulation of coronary blood flow. J.
Cardiovasc. Electrophysiol. 5, 154–181 (1994).
43. Hall, C.N. et al. Capillary pericytes regulate cerebral blood flow in health and
disease. Nature 508, 55–60 (2014).
44. Wu, D.M., Minami, M., Kawamura, H. & Puro, D.G. Electrotonic transmission
within pericyte-containing retinal microvessels. Microcirculation 13, 353–363
(2006).
45. Matsushita, K. & Puro, D.G. Topographical heterogeneity of K(IR) currents in
pericyte-containing microvessels of the rat retina: effect of diabetes. J. Physiol.
(Lond.) 573, 483–495 (2006).
46. Wei, H.S. et al. Erythrocytes are oxygen-sensing regulators of the cerebral
microcirculation. Neuron 91, 851–862 (2016).
47. Chen, B.R., Kozberg, M.G., Bouchard, M.B., Shaik, M.A. & Hillman, E.M.C. A
critical role for the vascular endothelium in functional neurovascular coupling in
the brain. J. Am. Heart Assoc. 3, e000787 (2014).
© 2017 Nature America, Inc., part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1038/nn.4533 nature OSCIC
ONLINE METHODS
Animal husbandry. Adult (2–3 months old) male C57/BL6J (referred to as
‘wild-type’; Jackson Laboratories, USA), Acta2-GCaMP5-mCherry (C57/BL6J
background, courtesy of M. Kotlikoff, Cornell University), KIR2.1fl/fl, Tek-Cre
and EC KIR2.1−/− mice, all on a C57/BL6J background, were group-housed on
a 12-h light:dark cycle with environmental enrichment and free access to food
and water. All animal procedures received prior approval from the University of
Vermont Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee.
eneration of IR2.1−/− mice. Mice carrying a germline knockout of the
KIR2.1 gene specifically in ECs were generated by crossing mice carrying a
loxP-flanked allele of the KIR2.1 gene Kcnj2 (KIR2.1fl/fl; InGenious Targeting
Laboratory, USA) with mice in which Cre recombinase expression is driven by
the Tek promoter (Tek-Cre; Jackson Laboratories, USA)17. The presence of loxP
sites and Cre recombinase was confirmed by genotyping offspring before all
experiments by RT-PCR of tail clip samples using the following primer pairs:
loxP excision site: 5′-GCG GTC TGG CAG TAA AAA CTA TC-3′ (forward)
and 5′-GTG AAA CAG CAT TGC TGT CAC TT-3′ (reverse);
Cre recombinase: 5′-GCG GTC TGG CAG TAA AAA CTA TC-3′ (forward)
and 5′-GTG AAA CAG CAT TGC TGT CAC TT-3′ (reverse).
hemicals. We obtained 6,7-dichloro-1H-indole-2,3-dione 3-oxime (NS309),
tetrodotoxin citrate and 9,11-dideoxy-9α,11α-methanoepoxy PGF2α (U46619)
from Tocris Bioscience (USA). Unless otherwise noted, all other chemicals were
obtained from Sigma-Aldrich (USA).
lectrophysiology. Single ECs and capillary fragments were obtained from
mouse brains by mechanically disrupting two 160-µm-thick brain slices in icecold artificial cerebrospinal fluid (aCSF; 124 mM NaCl, 3 mM KCl, 2 mM CaCl2,
2 mM MgCl2, 1.25 mM NaH2PO4, 26 mM NaHCO3 and 4 mM glucose) using a
Dounce homogenizer. Debris was removed by passing the homogenate through
a 62-µm nylon mesh. Retained capillary fragments were washed into a solution consisting of 55 mM NaCl, 80 mM sodium-glutamate, 5.6 mM KCl, 2 mM
MgCl2, 4 mM glucose and 10 mM HEPES (pH 7.3), containing 0.5 mg/mL neutral
protease and 0.5 mg/mL elastase (Worthington, USA) plus 100 µM CaCl2, and
then incubated for 25 min at 36 °C. Following this, 0.5 mg/mL collagenase type
I (Worthington, USA) was added for an additional 2 min. Single cells and small
capillary fragments were dispersed by triturating 4–6 times with a fire-polished
glass Pasteur pipette. Pial ECs and SM cells were obtained by dissecting surface
arteries arising from the circle of Willis and the MCA and cleaning them of pia
mater. Vessels were then digested using the same conditions as described above
for 57 min, with collagenase being added for a final 3 min. Single SM cells, ECs
and EC patches were then dispersed by triturating 8–10 times.
Cells were patch-clamped in the conventional whole-cell configuration, and
currents were amplified using an Axopatch 200B amplifier. Currents were filtered
at 1 kHz and digitized at 10 kHz. Pipettes were fabricated from borosilicate glass
(1.5-mm outer diameter, 1.17-mm inner diameter; Sutter Instruments, USA),
fire-polished to give a tip resistance of 3–6 M and filled with a solution consisting of 10 mM NaOH, 11.4 mM KOH, 128.6 mM KCl, 1.1 mM MgCl2, 3.2 mM
CaCl2, 5 mM EGTA and 10 mM HEPES (300 nM free Ca2+; pH 7.2). In a subset
of experiments, pipettes were filled with 10 mM NaOH, 6.8 mM KOH, 133.2 mM
KCl, 5.5 mM MgCl2, 0.2 mM CaCl2, 5 mM EDTA and 10 mM HEPES (3 µM free
Ca2+; pH 7.2). For 0 [Ca2+]i
 experiments, the pipette solution consisted of 10 mM
NaCl, 11.4 mM KOH, 128.6 mM KCl, 1 mM MgCl2, 5 mM EGTA and 10 mM
HEPES (pH 7.2). The bath solution consisted of 80 or 134 mM NaCl, 60 or 6 mM
KCl, 1 mM MgCl2, 10 mM HEPES, 4 mM glucose and 2 mM CaCl2 (pH 7.4).
The mean capacitance of capillary ECs was 9.4 ± 0.3 pF (n = 65), corresponding
to a membrane surface area of ~940 µm2.
Quantitative RT-PR. Samples were prepared using a modified isolation protocol, as described previously48. Briefly, capillary branches were isolated and
prepared using the Ambion Single Cell-to-CT kit for RT-qPCR (ThermoFisher
Scientific, Grand Island, NY, USA). Reactions were then prepared using
TaqMan gene expression MasterMix (ThermoFisher Scientific) and primers for
KIR2.1 (Kcnj2; RefSeq NM_008425.4) and eNOS (Nos3; RefSeq NM_008713.4;
ThermoFisher Scientific). Transcripts were preamplified for 14 cycles before
RT-qPCR, as per the manufacturer’s instructions, followed by 40 cycles of qPCR
for transcripts of interest. No-template controls were included in all conditions. To account for the possible presence of non-ECs in capillary samples, we
normalized Kcnj2 expression in capillaries to expression of endothelial nitric
oxide synthase (Nos3).
Isolated pressurized parenchymal arterioles and aPA preparation. The CaPA
extension of our routinely used pressurized arteriolar preparation21–23 in mice
was obtained by dissecting parenchymal arterioles arising from the M1 region of
the middle cerebral artery, leaving the attached capillary bed intact. Precapillary
arteriolar segments were cannulated on glass micropipettes on a Living Systems
Instrumentation (USA) pressure myograph, with one end occluded by a tie.
The ends of the capillaries were then sealed by the downward pressure of an
overlying glass micropipette. Application of pressure (40 mmHg) to the cannulated parenchymal arteriole segment in this preparation pressurized the
entire tree and induced myogenic tone in the parenchymal arteriole segment, as
previously described for parenchymal arterioles without capillaries21–23. With
this preparation, vasoactive substances were applied at specific points along the
capillary–arteriole continuum by pressure ejection from a glass micropipette
(tip diameter, 5 ± 1 µm; n = 16) attached to a Picospritzer III (Parker, USA) at
5 ± 2 psi (n = 16) for 18 s (unless otherwise noted). Luminal diameter in parenchymal arterioles was acquired simultaneously in two different regions of the arteriolar segment at 15 Hz using IonWizard 6.2 edge-detection software (IonOptix,
USA). Changes in arteriolar diameter were calculated from the average luminal
diameter measured over the last 10 s of stimulation.
embrane potential. For SM membrane potential recordings, parenchymal
arterioles, with attached capillary ramifications, were pressurized to 40 mmHg,
as described above. After development of myogenic tone, myosin light chain
kinase was inhibited with 800 nM wortmannin to prevent movement artifacts.
Myocytes were then impaled with glass microelectrodes filled with 0.5 M KCl
(tip resistance, 200–250 MΩ). A WPI Intra 767 amplifier was used for recording membrane potential. Analog output from the amplifier was obtained using
AxoScope (Molecular Devices) software (sampling frequency, 417 Hz). Criteria
for accepting recordings were (i) an abrupt negative deflection of potential as the
microelectrode was advanced into the cell, (ii) stable membrane potential for at
least 1 min and (iii) an abrupt change in potential to ~0 mV after retracting the
electrode from the cell.
Fluorescence staining. CaPA preparations were prepared from brain tissue isolated from Acta2-GCaMP5-mCherry mice and incubated with FITC-conjugated
isolectin B4 (10 µg/mL) in aCSF for 30 min. Fluorescence was visualized with an
Andor Revolution confocal system (Andor Technology, UK) equipped with an
upright 10× objective (NA 0.25) and CCD camera.
In vivo imaging of cerebral hemodynamics. Mice were anesthetized with
isoflurane (5% induction, 2% maintenance). Upon obtaining surgical-plane
anesthesia, the skull was exposed and a stainless steel head plate was attached
over the left hemisphere using a mixture of dental cement and superglue.
The head plate was secured in a holding frame, and a small (~2-mm diameter)
circular cranial window was drilled in the skull above the somatosensory cortex.
Approximately 300 µL of a 1-mg/mL solution of FITC (molecular weight, 2,000
kDa) in saline was injected via the tail vein to allow visualization of the cerebral
vasculature and contrast imaging of RBCs. Upon conclusion of surgery, isoflurane
anesthesia was replaced with α-chloralose (50 mg/kg) and urethane (750 mg/kg).
Body temperature was maintained at 37 °C throughout the experiment using
an electric heating pad. Penetrating arterioles were first identified by observing
RBCs flowing into the brain (as opposed to out of the brain via venules), and
capillaries downstream of arterioles were selected for study. A pipette was next
introduced into the solution covering the exposed cortex, and the duration and
pressure of ejection were calibrated (200–300 ms, 8 ± 1 psi; n = 59) to obtain a
small solution plume (radius, ~10 µm). The pipette was maneuvered into the cortex and positioned adjacent to the capillary under study (mean depth, 73 ± 6 µm;
n = 19), after which agents were ejected directly onto the capillary. Placement
of the pipette in the brain as described restricted agent delivery to the capillary
under study and caused minimal displacement of the surrounding tissue (Fig. 3d
and Supplementary Videos 2 and 3). Spatial coverage of the ejected solution was
monitored by including tetramethylrhodamine isothiocyanate (TRITC, 150 kDa;
© 2017 Nature America, Inc., part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
nature OSCIC doi:10.1038/nn.4533
0.2 mg/mL)-labeled dextran. RBC velocity and flux data were collected by line
scanning the capillary of interest at 5 kHz. For experiments in which KIR channels
or neural activity were blocked, 100 µM BaCl2 or 3 µM tetrodotoxin in aCSF,
respectively, was applied to the cranial surface for a minimum of 20 min to allow
penetration. Whisker stimulation was performed using a piezoelectric actuator
driven by a waveform generator coupled to an amplifier (Piezo Master; Viking
Industrial Products). Whiskers were stimulated at a frequency of 4 Hz for 1 min
with a total deflection of 5 mm. Images were acquired through a Zeiss 20× Plan
Apochromat 1.0 NA DIC VIS-IR water-immersion objective mounted on a Zeiss
LSM-7 multiphoton microscope (Zeiss, USA) coupled to a Coherent Chameleon
Vision II Titanium-Sapphire pulsed infrared laser (Coherent, USA). FITC and
TRITC were excited at 820 nm, and emitted fluorescence was separated through
500–550-nm and 570–610-nm bandpass filters, respectively.
aser oppler flowmetry. Functional hyperemia in the whisker barrel cortex was
measured using laser Doppler flowmetry, as previously described27. Mice were
anesthetized with isoflurane (5% induction, 2% maintenance). At the conclusion
of surgery, isoflurane anesthesia was withdrawn and replaced with α-chloralose
(50 mg/kg) and urethane (750 mg/kg). Body temperature was monitored with
a rectal probe and maintained at 37 °C by a servo-controlled heating pad. The
femoral artery was catheterized for mean arterial pressure recording and blood
gas measurement (Supplementary Table 2). The head was immobilized using a
stereotactic frame and the cisterna magna was punctured to relieve intracranial
pressure, after which a 2 × 2 mm cranial window was prepared over the whisker
barrel cortex. The window was continuously superfused with aCSF, and a laser
Doppler flow probe (Perimed) was placed over the window for CBF measurement. Arterial pressure and CBF were recorded using PowerLab software (AD
Instruments) and were allowed to equilibrate for 30 min before experimentation. Functional hyperemia was assessed by stimulating contralateral whiskers.
Whiskers were stimulated at a frequency of ~4 Hz for 1 min. Ba2+ (100 µM) was
delivered via the cranial window superfusate.
In vivo electrophysiology. Local field potentials (LFPs) in the whisker barrel cortex were recorded essentially as previously described49. Briefly, a cranial window
was prepared as described above, after which a 2 × 4 array of tetrodes (25 µm
Nichrome wire, AM–Systems Inc., USA) was implanted in the whisker barrel cortex. A ground wire was implanted over the cerebellum through a separate (~0.5
× 0.5 mm) window. Neuronal activity was recorded in response to contralateral
whisker stimulation. Signals were preamplified 1× at the headstage, were sampled
at 30 kHz and filtered at 1–9,000 Hz (Neuralynx, MT, USA). All LFP signals were
referenced against the ground wire placed above the cerebellum. Whiskers were
stimulated manually at a frequency of ~4–6 Hz for 1 min. Ba2+ (100 µM) was
delivered in aCSF via the cranial window superfusate.
ata analysis. Patch-clamp data were analyzed using Clampfit 9.2 software.
In diameter and membrane potential experiments, response onset was measured
for deflections from baseline > 5%. Changes in arteriolar diameter were calculated
from the average luminal diameter measured over the last 10 s of stimulation.
RBC flux and velocity were analyzed offline using ImageJ software. RBC velocity
was calculated from measurements of the angle of each individual RBC appearing
on the linescan. Flux data were binned at 1-s intervals. Mean baseline velocity
and flux data for summary figures were obtained by averaging the baseline (~3 s)
for each measurement before pressure ejection of 10 mM K+. The peak response
was defined as the peak 1-s flux bin after delivery of K+ within the remaining
scanning period (~17 s). Because flux and velocity are correlated, the average
velocity of all cells in the peak flux bin was reported for velocity summary data.
The distance from the site of pressure ejection to the feed arteriole was estimated
using the Pythagorean theorem applied to manual measurements taken along
the x-, y- and z-axes of z-stack image series taken of the local vasculature at the
time of pipette placement. The depth of capillaries below the surface was estimated from z-stack series acquired before pipette placement. The CBF response
to whisker stimulation was quantified by calculating the total area under the curve
of the CBF trace during the 60-s whisker stimulation period. LFPs were analyzed
with custom-written software using the Matlab Signal Processing and Chronux50
toolboxes and were initially notch-filtered to remove 60-Hz noise. Spectrograms
were computed from fast Fourier transforms. Whisker stimulation reliably evoked
clear oscillations between approximately 4 and 6 Hz, and therefore we focused
our analysis primarily on this band of interest, assessing mean frequency and
signal magnitude in 8-s epochs starting 10 s after the stimulus onset. We also
analyzed the mean frequency and peak magnitude of oscillations in 0–4-Hz and
6–20-Hz bands.
Statistics. Statistical testing was performed using Graphpad Prism 6 software.
Data are expressed as means ± s.e.m., and a P-value ≤ 0.05 was considered significant. Stars denote significant differences; ‘n.s.’ indicates nonsignificant comparisons. Statistical tests are noted in figure legends. All t-tests were two-sided. All
data passed the Kolmogorov–Smirnov test for normality. No statistical methods
were used to predetermine sample sizes, and experiments were repeated to adequately reduce confidence intervals and avoid errors in statistical testing. Sample
size estimation was predicated on similar experiments performed previously in
our laboratory. Data collection and analysis were not performed blind to the
conditions of the experiments. Randomization was not performed and exclusions
were not made. A Supplementary ethods hecklist is available.
ata availability. The data that support the findings of this study are available
from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.
48. Westcott, E.B., Goodwin, E.L., Segal, S.S. & Jackson, W.F. Function and expression
of ryanodine receptors and inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptors in smooth muscle
cells of murine feed arteries and arterioles. J. Physiol. (Lond.) 590, 1849–1869
(2012).
49. Barry, J.M. et al. Temporal coordination of hippocampal neurons reflects cognitive
outcome post-febrile status epilepticus. EBioMedicine 7, 175–190 (2016).
50. Mitra, P. & Bokil, H. Observed Brain Dynamics (Oxford University Press, 2008).
© 2017 Nature America, Inc., part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.


J Physiol 589.9 (2011) pp 2383–2399 2383
The Journal of Physiology
The electrotonic architecture of the retinal
microvasculature: modulation by angiotensin II
Ting Zhang1,2, David M. Wu2, Ge-zhi Xu1 and Donald G. Puro2,3
1
Department of Ophthalmology, Eye and ENT Hospital, Shanghai Medical School, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
2
Department of Ophthalmology & Visual Sciences, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA
3
Department of Molecular & Integrative Physiology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA
Non-technical summary In the quest to understand how the circulatory system adjusts microvascular function to meet local metabolic demand, we focused on the retina whose circulatory
system consists exclusively of microvessels. Since voltages induced by extracellular signals play a
key role in generating vasomotor responses, we characterized the movement of voltage within the
retinal microvasculature. To do this, we quantified voltage transmission between pairs of recording
pipettes located at well-defined sites in capillary/arteriole plexuses freshly isolated from the rat
retina. We found that the retinal microvasculature is not simply a homogeneous syncytium,
but has a complex electrotonic architecture with differing efficacies of voltage transmission.
Furthermore, we discovered that the electrotonic architecture is not static, but is modulated by
angiotensin. This newly appreciated action reveals that vasoactive signals can alter the functional
organization of the microvasculature and, thereby, regulate the spatial extent of the circulatory
system’s response to voltage-changing inputs.
Abstract The capillary/arteriole complex is the key operational unit regulating local perfusion
to meet metabolic demand. However, much remains to be learned about how this multicellular
unit is functionally organized. To help address this challenge, we characterized the electrotonic architecture of the retinal microvasculature, which is particularly well adapted for the
decentralized control of blood flow. In this study, we quantified the transmission of voltage
between pairs of perforated-patch pipettes sealed onto abluminal cells located on microvascular
complexes freshly isolated from the adult rat retina. These complexes consisted of capillaries,
as well as tertiary and secondary arterioles. Dual recording experiments revealed that voltage
spreading axially through a capillary, tertiary arteriole or secondary arteriole is transmitted very
efficiently with a decay rate of only ∼5% per 100 μm. However, the retinal microvasculature is
not simply a well-coupled syncytium since we detected significant voltage dissipation with radial
abluminal cell-to-endothelium transmission and also at branch points between a capillary and its
tertiary arteriole and between tertiary and secondary arterioles. Consistent with capillaries being
particularly well-suited for the task of transmitting voltages induced by vasoactive signals, radial
transmission is most efficient in this portion of the retinal microvasculature. Dual recordings also
revealed that angiotensin II potently inhibits axial transmission. As a functional consequence, the
geographical extent of the microvasculature’s response to voltage-changing inputs is markedly
restricted in the presence of angiotensin. In addition, this effect of angiotensin established that the
electrotonic architecture of the retinal microvasculature is not static, but rather, is dynamically
modulated by vasoactive signals.
(Received 18 November 2010; accepted after revision 1 March 2011; first published online 8 March 2011)
Corresponding author D. G. Puro: Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, University of Michigan, 1000
Wall Street, Ann Arbor, MI 48105, USA. Email: dgpuro@umich.edu
Abbreviations AT1, angiotensin receptor type 1; Cm, membrane capacitance; KATP, ATP-sensitive potassium channel;
KIR, inwardly rectifying potassium channel; NSC, non-specific cation; VDCC, voltage-dependent calcium channel
C 2011 The Authors. Journal compilation C 2011 The Physiological Society DOI: 10.1113/jphysiol.2010.202937
2384 T. Zhang and others J Physiol 589.9
Introduction
Capillaries may play a more active role in the regulation of
blood flow than traditionally thought (Beach et al. 1998;
McGahren et al. 1998; Schonfelder et al. 1998; Peppiatt
et al. 2006; Puro, 2007). Significant progress in establishing
this previously unappreciated function for capillaries has
come from studies of the retinal vasculature. In the quest
to better understand how local perfusion is regulated,
investigators have focused on the circulatory system of
the retina since it appears to be particularly well adapted
for the decentralized control of blood flow. Indicative of
this adaptation, retinal capillaries possess a high density of
abluminally positioned pericytes (Shepro & Morel, 1993),
which have a number ofmyocyte-like characteristics (Joyce
et al. 1985; Tilton, 1991; Shepro & Morel, 1993; Hirschi &
D’Amore, 1996) and whose contractions alter the capillary
lumen (Schonfelder et al. 1998; Kawamura et al. 2003;
Peppiatt et al. 2006; Puro, 2007) and thereby may affect
local perfusion.
Evidence is accumulating that the retinal microvasculature is an interactive complex that includes a
network of capillaries and a tertiary arteriole that links the
capillaries with a secondary arteriole. Consistent with this
operational concept, gap junction pathways link retinal
capillaries to the proximal microvasculature (Oku et al.
2001). As in the microvasculature of other tissues (Song
& Tyml, 1993; McGahren et al. 1998; Cohen et al. 2000),
a functional manifestation of this interconnectivity is the
observation that voltages generated in the capillaries of
the retina spread efficiently to proximal sites (Ishizaki
et al. 2009). Furthermore, localized electrical stimulation
of a pericyte in the intact retina not only increases the
contractile tone of the stimulated pericyte, but also evokes
contractions in distantly located abluminal cells (Peppiatt
et al. 2006).
Indicative of the complex operational organization of
the retinal microvasculature, recent studies have revealed
functional sub-specialization within this complex. For
example, functional KATP channels are predominately
located in the capillaries (Ishizaki et al. 2009) while
functional voltage-dependent calcium channels (VDCCs)
are chiefly in the proximal portions of the microvasculature (Matsushita et al. 2010). As a consequence,
in order to initiate a VDCC-driven vasomotor response, a
KATP-mediated voltage change generated in the capillaries
must be transmitted proximally via gap junction pathways
(Matsushita et al. 2010).
Despite recent progress in elucidating the
organizational complexity and interactivity of the
retinal microvasculature, much remains to be learned. To
help address this gap in knowledge, a goal of this study was
to quantitatively characterize the electrotonic architecture
of the capillary–tertiary arteriole–secondary arteriole
complex. Another goal was to determine whether the
electrotonic architecture of the retinal microvasculature
is static or whether it is subject to modulation by
extracellular signals, such as angiotensin II. This molecule
was of interest because we previously observed that
exposure of retinal capillaries to angiotensin not only
causes pericytes to contract as stored calcium is released
and calcium-permeable non-specific cation channels are
activated, but also results in a decrease in the membrane
capacitance (Cm), which may reflect a lessening of cell
coupling (Kawamura et al. 2004). However, because Cm
can be affected by membrane changes unrelated to cell
coupling (Gillis, 1995), this study sought to definitively
determine whether angiotensin modulates electrotonic
transmission within the retinal microvasculature.
To characterize the electrotonic architecture of the
retinal microvasculature, we quantified the spread of
depolarization between pairs of perforated-patch pipettes
sealed onto abluminal cells located in microvascular
complexes freshly isolated from the adult rat retina.
These complexes included a secondary arteriole, a tertiary
arteriole and a network of capillaries (Matsushita & Puro,
2006; Ishizaki et al. 2009). An experimental advantage
of this preparation is that it allows analysis of the intact
capillary/arteriole complex, rather than simply capillary
fragments as we studied previously (Wu et al. 2006).
Also, it is easy to visually identify the abluminal cells
of each portion of the retinal microvasculature, i.e. the
pericytes of the capillaries, the myocytes of the tertiary
arterioles and the encircling smooth muscle cells of the
secondary arterioles (Matsushita & Puro, 2006). Thus,
with isolated microvessels, it is relatively straightforward
to quantify electrotonic transmission between a pair of
perforated-patch pipettes that are sealed onto abluminal
cells at two well defined locations within the retinal microvasculature.
In this first characterization of the electrotonic
architecture of the retinal microvasculature, we found
that axial transmission is highly efficient within the
capillaries, tertiary arterioles and secondary arterioles.
However, a significant dissipation of voltage occurs at
the branch point of a capillary and a tertiary arteriole,
as well as at the tertiary arteriole–secondary arteriole
junction. In addition, our experiments showed that voltage
dissipation also occurs with radial transmission between
an abluminal cell and the endothelium. Consistent with
the capillary network being particularly well-suited for
generating and transmitting voltages, radial transmission
is most efficient in this portion of the retinal microvasculature. Importantly, our observation that angiotensin
II selectively and profoundly inhibits axial transmission
lends support for the operational concept that the electrotonic architecture of the retinal microvasculature is not
static, but rather, is dynamically modulated by vasoactive
signals.
C 2011 The Authors. Journal compilation C 2011 The Physiological Society
J Physiol 589.9 Electrotonic architecture of the retinal microvasculature 2385
Methods
Animal use conformed to the guidelines set forth by the
Association for Research in Vision and Ophthalmology
and was approved by the University of Michigan
Committee on the Use and Care of Animals. The
experimental procedures also comply with the polices set
out by The Journal of Physiology (Drummond, 2009). This
study used 76 Long–Evans rats (Charles River, Cambridge,
MA, USA), which were 6–9 weeks old, weighed between
125 and 325 g and included approximately equal numbers
of males and females. The animals were maintained on
a 12 h alternating light–dark cycle and received food
and water ad libitum. Death was induced with a rising
concentration of carbon dioxide.
Microvessel isolation
A tissue print technique (Ishizaki et al. 2009) was used
to isolate microvascular complexes from the retinas of
male and female rats that were 6–9 weeks old. In brief,
the procedure for microvessel isolation included the rapid
removal of retinas, excision of adherent vitreous, and
incubation for ∼24 min at 30◦C in Earle’s balanced salt
solution supplemented with 0.5 mM EDTA, 6 U papain
(Worthington Biochemical Corp., Lakewood, NJ, USA)
and 2 mM cysteine. Subsequently, retinas were placed in
solution A and quadrisected, where solution A consisted
of 140 mM NaCl, 3 mM KCl, 1.8 mM CaCl2, 0.8 mM MgCl2,
10 mM Na-Hepes, 15 mM mannitol, and 5 mM glucose at
pH 7.4 with osmolarity adjusted to 310 mosmol l−1. Each
quadrant of retina was then positioned vitreal-surface-up
onto the glass bottom of a chamber containing solution
A and gently compressed by a glass coverslip (15 mm
diameter, 0.15 mm thick; CS-15R, Warner Instrument
Corp., Hamden, CT, USA) onto which microvascular
complexes adhered. As shown in published photomicrographs (Matsushita & Puro, 2006; Ishizaki et al.
2009) and the schematic diagram in Fig. 1, the isolated
microvascular complexes used in this study included,
from proximal to distal, a secondary arteriole encircled
by a single layer of ‘doughnut-shaped’ smooth muscle
cells, a tertiary arteriole with a layer of ‘dome-shaped’
myocytes at a density of ≥5 somas per 100 μm, and
a capillary network whose abluminal cells, the pericytes, appear as ‘bumps on a log’ (Kuwabara & Cogan,
1960) with a density of ≤4 per 100 μm. As documented
previously (Ishizaki et al. 2009), approximately 200 μm
from its junction with a myocyte-encircled secondary
arteriole, a tertiary arteriole bifurcates into two branches
each of which typically extends another ∼200 μm before
splitting into a pair of capillaries.
Electrophysiology
Experiments were performed at room temperature, i.e.
22–23◦C, within 5 h after microvessel isolation. In some
experiments, a micromanipulator-guided micropipette
was used to transect freshly isolated microvascular
complexes at the capillary–secondary arteriole and the
tertiary arteriole–secondary arteriole junctions. Details
of this transaction technique are available (Ishizaki et al.
2009).
Perforated-patch recordings were made at sites along
a freshly isolated microvessel located on a coverslip
positioned in a recording chamber whose perfusate
was solution A without or with 500 nM angiotensin II.
The solution filling the recording pipettes consisted of
50 mM KCl, 65 mM K2SO4,6mM MgCl2, 10 mM K-Hepes,
60 μg ml−1 amphotericin B and 60 μg ml−1 nystatin at
pH 7.35 and osmolarity 280 mosmol l−1. Recording
pipettes had resistances of ∼5 M and were mounted in
the holder of a patch-clamp amplifier (Axopatch 200B,
Molecular Devices, Sunnyvale, CA, USA or Dagan 3900,
Dagan Corp., Minneapolis, MN, USA). The tip of a
recording pipette was sealed with a resistance of ≥10 G
onto an abluminal cell, i.e. a smooth muscle cell encircling
a secondary arteriole, a myocyte positioned on the wall
of tertiary arteriole or a pericyte located on a capillary.
Figure 1. Schematic diagram showing the portion of the rat
retinal microvasculature isolated by the tissue print procedure
used in this study
In this study, perforated-patch pipettes were sealed onto smooth
muscle cells that encircle secondary arterioles, myocytes that are
positioned on the endothelium of tertiary arterioles and abluminal
pericytes located on the capillaries. Modified from Matsushita et al.
2010 with permission from the Association for Research in Vision
and Ophthalmology.
C 2011 The Authors. Journal compilation C 2011 The Physiological Society
2386 T. Zhang and others J Physiol 589.9
In microvascular complexes isolated by our tissue print
technique, it is straightforward to visually identify these
abluminal cells (Matsushita & Puro, 2006). Of note, to
confirm that recording pipettes could reliably be sealed
onto pericytes and to assess gap junction-mediated interactions of these abluminal cells, we previously (Oku
et al. 2001; Kawamura et al. 2002) used standard
whole-cell pipettes loaded with Neurobiotin, which is
a gap junction-permeant tracer. Under conditions that
inhibit gap junction function, we found that 36 of 36
recording pipettes that were judged by visual inspection to
be sealed onto a capillary pericyte were in fact so located
since only a single pericyte became loaded with Neurobiotin diffusing from the pipette (Oku et al. 2001); endothelial cells were never labelled under conditions in which
gap junctions were closed. Our studies also indicated that
under control conditions, Neurobiotin spreads from a
sampled pericyte to the underlying endothelium (Oku
et al. 2001).
The access resistance for the recordings used in this
study was <25 M. Currents and voltages were filtered
with a four-pole Bessel filter, sampled digitally at 500
or 2000 Hz using a DigiData 1440A acquisition system
(Molecular Devices) and stored by a computer equipped
with pCLAMP (version 10, Molecular Devices), which
along with other software (Origin, v. 8.1, OriginLab Corp.,
Northampton, MA, USA), aided with data analysis and
graphics display. Junction potential adjustment was made
after data collection. The resting membrane potentials
recorded from the capillaries, tertiary arterioles and
secondary arterioles of isolated retinal microvascular
complexes were –43 ± 1 mV (n = 27), –42 ± 1 mV
(n = 29) and –45 ± 1 mV (n = 10), respectively; these
potential were not significantly different. The input
resistance calculated using the change in current
induced by a 20 mV hyperpolarization from a holding
potential of −58 mV was 175 ± 19 M, 151 ± 9 M
and 127 ± 15 M for voltage-clamp recordings from
capillaries, tertiary arterioles and secondary arterioles, respectively; these resistances were not significantly
different.
Dual recording experiments
Dual perforated-patch recordings provided a measure
the efficacy of electrotonic transmission within the
retinal microvasculature. In these experiments, voltages
were monitored via pipettes sealed onto abluminal cells
located at two sites along a microvessel while a 750 ms
step of current was injected at 3 s intervals via one
of the pipettes. For each current step, the ratio of
the voltage change detected at the non-stimulated site
(Vresponder) to the voltage step induced at the site
of current injection (Vstimulator) was calculated. Each
value plotted in Fig. 3 is the mean of at least 30
successive Vresponder/Vstimulator ratios. Because the effect
of angiotensin on the Vresponder/Vstimulator ratio was
transient, the values plotted in Fig. 7 are the average of
the three successive ratios obtained during the maximal
effect of angiotensin on this ratio. First-order exponential
fits of the dual recording data presented in Figs 3 and 7
were made using commercially available software (Origin,
v. 8.1). A photomicrograph of the each studied microvascular complex provided documentation of the location
of each recording pipette in the retinal microvasculature
and aided in the determination of the distance between
the pair of recording pipettes.
Of note, conduction through the bathing solution
did not contribute to the observed Vresponder since
pipette-to-pipette transmission was not detected after
one of the two recording seals was spontaneously lost
or when one of the pipettes was positioned close to,
but not sealed onto, the microvessel. As we observed
previously (Wu et al. 2006), there was no significant
difference in the Vresponder/Vstimulator ratios generated
by a depolarization or a hyperpolarization; neither did
the direction of transmission, i.e. distal to proximal or
proximal to distal, significantly affect this ratio.
To calculate the velocity at which a voltage was
conducted between two recording sites, the interpipette
distance was determined from a photomicrograph of
the sampled microvessel and with the aid of pCLAMP
software, the time interval between the onset of the
depolarization induced in the current-injected cell and
the onset of the depolarization detected at the distant
recording site was determined. For these calculations, dual
recordings with interpipette distances of ≥200 μm were
used.
Single perforated-patch recordings
In some experiments (Figs 10 and 11), voltage steps from
a holding potential of –58 mV were used to generate
current–voltage plots. As done previously (Sakagami et al.
1999; Kawamura et al. 2003; Kawamura et al. 2004),
the amplitude of the non-specific cation current was
measured from recordings in which the voltage was
stepped to –103 mV, which is the K+ equilibrium potential.
For the calculation of conductance densities, membrane
capacitances were determined by the method of Zhao &
Santos-Sacchi (1998).
Immunocytochemistry
Unless otherwise noted, this protocol was performed
at room temperature. After microvessel-containing
coverslips were rinsed in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS)
and fixed with 4% formaldehyde in PBS for 30 min,
endogenous peroxidase activity was blocked by 0.3%
C 2011 The Authors. Journal compilation C 2011 The Physiological Society
J Physiol 589.9 Electrotonic architecture of the retinal microvasculature 2387
hydrogen peroxide in PBS for 30 min. Coverslips were then
exposed overnight at 4◦C to a well-characterized primary
anti-angiotensin receptor type 1 (AT1) antibody (product
no. AAR-011, Alomone Labs, Jerusalem, Israel) that was
diluted 1:100 in PBS supplemented with 1.5% normal
goat serum. Two negative controls were used. In one
control, the primary antibody was omitted. As a second
negative control, the primary antibody was pre-incubated
with the antigen peptide (NSSTEDGIKRIQDDC, which
corresponds to amino acid residues 4–18 of human AT1
receptor) for 1 h preceding application onto microvessels.
After incubation with biotin-conjugated goat anti-rabbit
IgG (1:200, Vector Laboratories, Inc., Burlingame, CA,
USA) for 1 h, coverslips were kept for ∼40 h at
4◦C in a horseradish peroxidase-streptavidin solution
(RTU, Vector Laboratories) and then exposed to the
avidin–biotin–peroxidase complex (1:100, ABC method,
Vector Laboratories) for 30 min. After development of
diaminobenzidine (DAB kit, Vector Laboratories), photomicrographs were taken with differential interference
contrast optics.
Chemicals
Unless otherwise noted, chemicals were obtained from
Sigma-Aldrich (St Louis, MO, USA).
Statistics and data analysis
Data are given as means ± SEM. Probability was evaluated
by Student’s two-tailed t test, unless noted otherwise. For
the comparison of two groups, P ≥ 0.05 indicated lack
of a significant difference. For the statistical comparison
of three groups, the P-value was adjusted using the
Bonferroni correction.
Results
Dual recordings from capillaries, tertiary arterioles
and secondary arterioles
In order to characterize the electrotonic architecture of
the retinal microvasculature, we quantified the spread of
depolarization between pairs of perforated-patch pipettes
sealed onto abluminal cells located on microvascular
complexes freshly isolated from the adult rat retina. Each
complex studied contained a capillary network branching
from a tertiary arteriole that originated from a secondary
arteriole (Fig. 1). An example of such an experiment is
shown in Fig. 2. In the illustrated experiment, a pair of
pipettes was sealed onto myocytes located on a tertiary
arteriole (Fig. 2A and B). The experimental protocol
was to inject a depolarizing current into one of the
monitored myocytes while the change in voltage was
monitored at both recording sites (Fig. 2C). The ratio of
the voltage change measured at the non-stimulated site, i.e.
Vresponder, to the voltage change in the current-injected
cell, i.e. Vstimulator, yielded a measure of the efficacy of
electrotonic transmission between the pair of recording
pipettes.
In a series of dual recording experiments, the
Vresponder/Vstimulator ratios were determined for a range
of interpipette distances within capillaries, tertiary arterioles and secondary arterioles (Fig. 3). As is evident in Fig. 3,
the interpipette distance had only a minimal effect on the
Vresponder/Vstimulator ratio. More specifically, first-order
exponential fits of these data yielded voltage decay rates
of 2 ± 2%/100 μm (n = 27) in the capillaries (Fig. 3A),
6 ± 8%/100 μm (n = 22)in the tertiary arterioles (Fig. 3B)
and 6 ± 8%/100 μm (n = 10) in the secondary arterioles (Fig. 3C); these decay rates were not significantly
different. Based on these findings, we concluded that axial
Figure 2. Example of a dual perforated-patch recording used to measure electrotonic transmission
within a tertiary arteriole
A and B, photomicrographs of the sampled microvessel showing the recording sites on a tertiary arteriole. Scale
bars: 50 μm. C, left, voltage trace recorded by a pipette sealed onto an abluminal myocyte into which a depolarizing
current was injected. Right, the voltage trace recorded via the pipette sealed onto myocyte located on the tertiary
at a distance of 200 μm from the stimulated (current-injected) myoctye. For this pair of recordings from tertiary
arteriolar myocytes, the Vresponder/Vstimulator ratio was 0.34.
C 2011 The Authors. Journal compilation C 2011 The Physiological Society
2388 T. Zhang and others J Physiol 589.9
transmission is highly efficient within the capillaries, the
tertiary arterioles and the secondary arterioles of the
retinal microvasculature.
Models of the electrotonic architecture
of the retinal microvasculature
What is the intercellular pathway by which voltage is
transmitted from a current-injected abluminal cell to
another abluminal cell? One possibility considered was
that electrotonic transmission is predominantly from
abluminal cell-to-abluminal cell. Since the decay of voltage
spreading along this homocellular pathway would be
expected to be, at least approximately, a first-order
process, the extrapolated Vresponder/Vstimulator ratio at
an interpipette distance of 0 μm should be 1.0. However,
in contrast to this expectation, the first-order fits of
the observed Vresponder/Vstimulator ratios shown in
Fig. 3 did not extrapolate to 1.0 at 0 μm. Rather, the
extrapolated ratios at 0 μm were 0.58 ± 0.07, 0.29 ± 0.03
and 0.22 ± 0.04 for capillaries, tertiary arterioles and
secondary arterioles, respectively (Fig. 3). Thus, this
analysis of the Vresponder/Vstimulator data in Fig. 3
indicates that direct abluminal cell-to-abluminal cell
transmission is not likely to be the predominate pathway
for the spread of voltage from a current-injected abluminal
cell.
To further assess putative models for the spread of
voltage through the retinal microvasculature (Fig. 4),
the Vresponder/Vstimulator ratios observed in recordings
from adjacent abluminal cells, i.e. recordings with interpipette distances of ≤20 μm (Fig. 3), were initially used
to calculate the decay of voltage in a model in which axial
transmission was chiefly from abluminal cell to abluminal
cell. In Fig. 4A and B, the observed Vresponder/Vstimulator
ratios are compared with the ratios calculated for homocellular abluminal cell-to-abluminal cell transmission.
As shown in Fig. 4B, the homocellular model predicted
that the Vresponder/Vstimulator ratio at an interpipette
distance of 200 μm would be <0.00. However, this predicted ratio did not accurately match the observed ratio of
0.26 (Fig. 4A). Similarly, we found that this homocellular
model failed to account for the Vresponder/Vstimulator
ratios observed for distantly separated recording pairs in
capillaries and secondary arterioles.
What model can accurately account for the
Vresponder/Vstimulator data presented in Fig. 3? We
considered a heterocellular model in which voltage spreads
from a current-injected abluminal cell via the following
pathway: radially from that abluminal cell to the underlying endothelium, then axially through the endothelial
layer and finally radially from the endothelium to the
distantly located abluminal cell (Fig. 4C). In addition,
in order to account for substantial dissipation of voltage
being detected in dual recordings made at short interpipette distances and only minimal additional decay
with longer interpipette distances (Figs 3 and 4A), our
heterocellular model has relatively inefficient radial transmission and highly efficient axial transmission.
Experimental evidence supports the heterocellular
model. Consistent with there being radial communication
between abluminal cells and the endothelium, we reported
previously that loading the tracer Neurobiotin into
abluminal cells via whole-cell recording pipettes resulted
in the gap junction-dependent spread of this tracer into
and extensively through the endothelial layer of the retinal
microvasculature (Oku et al. 2001; Kawamura et al. 2002).
Also consistent with the heterocellular model in which
axial transmission through the endothelium is highly
efficient, our dual recording experiments indicated that
voltage spreading axially along a retinal microvessel decays
Figure 3. Plots of Vresponder/Vstimulator ratios versus the distance between a pair of recording sites
For each data set, the first-order exponential fit is shown. A, ratios for recordings from pairs of pericytes located
on capillaries. B, ratios for dual recordings from pairs of myocytes located on tertiary arterioles. C, ratios for dual
recordings from pairs of smooth muscle cells that encircled secondary arterioles. The mean of the ratios in panel
A (0.56 ± 0.03) was significantly (P < 0.001) different than those in panels B (0.27 ± 0.02) and C (0.25 ± 0.06);
the ratios in B and C are not significantly different.
C 2011 The Authors. Journal compilation C 2011 The Physiological Society
J Physiol 589.9 Electrotonic architecture of the retinal microvasculature 2389
Figure 4. Models of the electrotonic architecture
Each schematic drawing shows a tertiary arteriole with four
successively located abluminal myoctyes, as well as a myocyte
located 200 μm from the current-injected myocyte. A relative
voltage change of 1.0 was generated in the abluminal cell located
on the extreme left side. Of note, in tertiary arterioles of retinal
microvascular complexes, there are ≥5 myocytes per 100 μm
(Matsushita & Puro, 2006). A, relative voltage changes observed in
dual recordings from tertiary arterioles; data are from Fig. 3B. B,
model of homocellular abluminal cell-to-abluminal cell transmission.
Within each myocyte is shown the relative voltage change calculated
using 0.31 as the efficacy of axial transmission between adjacent
myoctyes; 0.31 was the Vresponder/Vstimulator ratio observed in
dual recordings from adjacent myocytes (Fig. 3B). Comparison of the
calculated ratios shown in this panel with the observed ratios in
panel A shows that this homocellular model failed to adequately
predict the Vresponder/Vstimulator ratio observed at an interpipette
distance of 200 μm. C, heterocellular model for the spread of
voltage from a current-injected abluminal cell. As detailed in the text
and listed in Table 3, the experimentally derived transmission
efficacies used to calculate the relative voltage changes in this
heterocellular model were 0.54 for radial myocyte-to-endothelium
transmission, 0.94/100 μm for axial transmission through the
arteriolar endothelium and 0.54 for endothelium-to-myocyte
transmission at the site of the distantly monitored myocyte. The
Vresponder/Vstimulator ratios calculated using this heterocellular
model closely matched the observed ratios shown in panel A. D,
relative voltage changes observed in dual recordings from tertiary
arterioles during exposure to angiotensin; data are from Fig. 7B. E,
heterocellular model in the presence of angiotensin. As detailed in
only ∼5% per 100 μm (Fig. 3). Also consistent with
our heterocellular model, dual recording experiments
indicated that radial transmission is less efficient. Namely,
a parsimonious explanationfor the Vresponder/Vstimulator
ratios in Fig. 3 extrapolating to <1.0 at 0 μm is that
the extrapolated ratio reflects the dissipation of voltage
during radial abluminal cell/endothelium transmission
at the current-injected site and also at the distantly
recorded site. Thus, for capillaries, the extrapolated
Vresponder/Vstimulator ratio of 0.58 ± 0.07 at the interpipette distance of 0 μm (Fig. 3A) is the product of the
transmission efficacy of 0.76 ± 0.05 for the passage of
voltage from a current-injected pericyte to the underlying
endothelium and 0.76 ± 0.05 for the passage of voltage
from the endothelium to the distantly monitored pericyte,
i.e. the overall transmission efficacy for these two radial
transmission steps is 0.76 × 0.76 = 0.58. Similarly for
tertiary arterioles, the extrapolated Vresponder/Vstimulator
ratio of 0.29 ± 0.03 at the interpipette distance of
0 μm (Fig. 3B) yields a radial transmission efficacy of
0.54 ± 0.04. For secondary arterioles, the extrapolated
value of 0.22 ± 0.04 (Fig. 3C) yields a radial transmission efficacy of 0.47 ± 0.06. Of note, these efficacies for
radial transmission in the arterioles were not significantly
different. However, of likely functional importance, the
efficacy of radial transmission in the capillaries was
significantly (P = 0.0027) greater in the capillaries than
in the arterioles.
As illustrated in Fig. 4C, our heterocellular model for
the spread of voltage from a current-injected abluminal
cell provided a reasonable prediction of the observed
Vresponder/Vstimulator ratios. Thus, even though we do
not exclude that there may be some transmission along the
abluminal cell layer, a heterocellular model in which radial
abluminal cell–endothelium transmission and endothelial
cell–endothelial cell transmission predominate appears to
account well for the observed results of the dual recording
experiments presented in Fig. 3.
Effect of branch points on electrotonic transmission
In addition to quantifying electrotonic transmission
within non-branching segments of intact microvascular
complexes, we also assessed the effect of branch points
the text and listed in Table 3, the experimentally derived transmission
efficacies used to calculate the relative voltage changes were 0.59
for radial myocyte-to-endothelium transmission, 0.52/100 μm for
axial transmission through the arteriolar endothelium and 0.59 for
endothelium-to-myocyte transmission at the site of the distantly
monitored myocyte; only axial transmission was significantly affected
by angiotensin. The Vresponder/Vstimulator ratios calculated using
this heterocellular model closely matched the observed ratios shown
in panel D.
C 2011 The Authors. Journal compilation C 2011 The Physiological Society
2390 T. Zhang and others J Physiol 589.9
Table 1. Dual recording experiments designed to determine the effect of the
capillary–tertiary arteriole branch point on the efficacy of electrotonic transmission
Tertiary Capillary-to-tertiary
Capillary arteriole Observed Predicted arteriole
distance distance Vresponder/ Vresponder/ transmission
Pair (μm) (μm) Vstimulator Vstimulator efficacy
1 128 325 0.20 0.35 0.57
2 58 122 0.22 0.38 0.58
3 155 205 0.20 0.36 0.56
4 290 90 0.21 0.36 0.58
5 205 305 0.20 0.34 0.59
6 335 33 0.14 0.37 0.39
7 220 85 0.24 0.37 0.65
8 160 170 0.23 0.36 0.64
0.20 ± 0.01 0.36 ± 0.004∗ 0.57 ± 0.03
For each of 8 dual recording experiments, one perforated-patch pipette was sealed
onto a pericyte located on a capillary while the other recording pipette was sealed
onto a myocyte located on the tertiary arteriole. The second and third columns
show the lengths of the capillary and tertiary arteriole between the two recording
sites. Also shown for each experiment is the observed Vresponder/Vstimulator ratio
and the ‘predicted’ ratio, which was calculated by using the transmission efficacies
derived from the data in Fig. 3A and B, i.e. 0.76 for radial transmission between a
pericyte and the underlying endothelium, 0.98/100 μm for axial transmission along
the capillary, 0.94/100 μm for axial transmission along the tertiary arteriole, and
0.54 for transmission from the endothelium to the myocyte of the tertiary arteriole.
For each pair of recordings, the observed Vresponder/Vstimulator ratio was smaller
than the predicted value; for this series of experiments, this was a significant
difference (∗P < 0.0001). The final column gives the calculated value that equalized
the predicted Vresponder/Vstimulator ratio with the experimentally determined
ratio; this calculated value was deemed to be the efficacy of transmission at the
capillary–tertiary arteriole branch point.
within the retinal microvascular complex. In a series of
eight experiments, dual recordings were made in which
one perforated-patch pipette was sealed onto a pericyte located on a capillary and the other pipette was
sealed onto an abluminal myocyte of the tertiary arteriole.
The Vresponder/Vstimulator ratios observed in these
experiments are shown in Table 1. Also shown in Table 1
are the ‘predicted’ ratios calculated using the efficacies
of radial and axial transmission derived as detailed
above. Consistent with a capillary/tertiary arteriole branch
point diminishing the efficacy of transmission, the
experimentally observed Vresponder/Vstimulator ratio was
significantly (P < 0.0001) less than the predicted ratio. To
adjust the predicted ratio to match the observed ratio,
the transmission efficacy at the capillary–tertiary arteriole
junction was calculated to be 0.57 ± 0.03.
We also assessed the effect of branch points between
tertiary and secondary arterioles. In series of seven dual
perforated-patch recordings in which one pipette was
sealed onto a myocyte of a tertiary arteriole and the other
onto a smooth muscle cell encircling a secondary arteriole,
the observed Vresponder/Vstimulator ratio was significantly
(P < 0.0001) less than that predicted by using the transmission efficacies determined for unbranched tertiary and
secondary arterioles (Table 2). In order to account for
the observed Vresponder/Vstimulator ratios, the efficacy
of transmission across the tertiary arteriole–secondary
arteriole junction was calculated to be 0.62 ± 0.14, which
was not significantly different from the transmission
efficacy determined for the capillary/tertiary arteriole
junction.
In other dual perforated-patch recordings, we used
analyses similar to those outlined above to assess the effects
of branch points within tertiary arterioles and capillaries.
We found that when one pipette was sealed onto a myocyte located on a branch of a tertiary arteriole and the
other pipette was sealed onto a myocyte on the proximal
stalk of this arteriole, the observed Vresponder/Vstimulator
ratio was 0.27 ± 0.03 (n = 16) at an interpipette distance
of 307 ± 42 μm. Consistent with a branch point within
a tertiary arteriole not affecting transmission, 0.27 was
also the Vresponder/Vstimulator ratio calculated by using
the efficacies determined for radial and axial transmission within tertiary arterioles. Thus, it appears that
branches within a tertiary arteriole did not cause voltage
dissipation.
C 2011 The Authors. Journal compilation C 2011 The Physiological Society
J Physiol 589.9 Electrotonic architecture of the retinal microvasculature 2391
Table 2. Dual recording experiments designed to determine the efficacy of electrotonic transmission at the tertiary
arteriole–secondary arteriole junction
Tertiary Secondary Tertiary arteriolearteriole arteriole Observed Predicted to-secondary arteriole
Cell distance (μm) distance (μm) Vresponder/Vstimulator Vresponder/Vstimulator transmission efficacy
1 22 61 0.12 0.25 0.48
2 42 58 0.14 0.25 0.56
3 33 63 0.16 0.25 0.64
4 5 55 0.17 0.25 0.68
5 50 13 0.22 0.25 0.88
6 50 270 0.10 0.22 0.45
7 60 270 0.15 0.22 0.68
0.14 ± 0.02 0.24 ± 0.004∗ 0.62 ± 0.05
For each pair of recordings, one perforated-patch pipette was sealed onto a myocyte of a tertiary arteriole and
the other onto a smooth muscle cell encircling a secondary arteriole. The second and third columns show the
axial lengths of the tertiary arteriole and the secondary arteriole that were between the two recording sites. For
each experiment, the table shows the observed Vresponder/Vstimulator ratio and the ‘predicted’ ratio, which was
calculated by using transmission efficacies derived from the data in Fig. 3B and C, i.e. 0.54 for radial transmission
between the current-injected myocyte of a tertiary arteriole and the underlying endothelium, 0.94/100 μm for
axial transmission along the endothelium of the tertiary arteriole, 0.94/100 μm for axial transmission along the
endothelium of the secondary arteriole, and 0.47 for radial transmission from the endothelium to the smooth muscle
cell monitored in the secondary arteriole. For each pair of recordings, the observed Vresponder/Vstimulator ratio was
smaller than the predicted value; for the series of experiments, this was a significant difference (∗P < 0.0001).
The final column gives the calculated value that equalized the predicted Vresponder/Vstimulator ratio with the
experimentally determined ratio; this value was deemed to be the efficacy of transmission at the site where a
tertiary arteriole branches from a secondary arteriole.
In other experiments, we recorded from pericytes at two
capillary sites between which there was a branch. For this
series of experiments, the observed Vresponder/Vstimulator
ratio at an interpipette distance of 236 ± 26 μm was
0.49 ± 0.06 (n = 6). Indicative that capillary branch points
did not cause a spreading voltage to dissipate, 0.55 was
the ratio calculated by using the efficacies of radial
and axial transmission in the capillaries. From these
data, we concluded that branches within capillaries, as
well as those within the tertiary arterioles, did not
affect electrotonic transmission. Thus, some classes of
branch points, i.e. capillary–tertiary arteriole and tertiary
arteriole–secondary arteriole, but not others affect the
spread of voltage within the retinal microvasculature.
Transmission velocities
In addition to providing data to quantify electrotonic transmission, the voltage traces recorded from a
current-injected abluminal cell and a distant responding
abluminal cell permitted the calculation of the velocity
at which a voltage is transmitted along a microvessel. We found that the conduction velocities along
capillaries, tertiary arterioles and secondary arterioles
were 50 ± 4 mm s−1 (n = 8), 53 ± 2 mm s−1 (n = 21) and
42 ± 10 mm s−1 (n = 6), respectively; these velocities are
not significantly different.
Taken together the results of our dual recording
experiments support the idea that the electrotonic architecture of the retinal microvasculature
is characterized chiefly by radial abluminal
cell–endothelium transmission and axial transmission
through the endothelial layer. Furthermore, the data
indicate that radial transmission is less efficient than axial
transmission within the capillaries, tertiary arterioles
and secondary arterioles. In addition, we found that
substantial voltage dissipation occurs at capillary–tertiary
arteriole branch points and also at junctions of tertiary
and secondary arterioles.
Effect of angiotensin on the electrotonic architecture
We considered the possibility that the electrotonic
architecture of the retinal microvasculature is not static,
but rather is dynamically modulated. Suggestive that the
vasoactive signal, angiotensin II, may affect cell coupling,
previous recordings from isolated retinal capillaries
showed that activation of AT1 receptors was associated
with a decrease in membrane capacitance (Kawamura et al.
2004). However, because membrane capacitance provides,
at best, only a qualitative suggestion of the extent of cell
coupling, we used dual recordings to quantify the effect
of angiotensin on electrotonic transmission. In addition,
since immunoreactivity for AT1 angiotensin receptors was
C 2011 The Authors. Journal compilation C 2011 The Physiological Society
2392 T. Zhang and others J Physiol 589.9
Figure 5. Immunoreactivity for the AT1 angiotensin II receptor
A, photomicrograph showing a portion of a microvascular complex
freshly isolated from the rat retina and stained with anti-AT1
antibody. Microvascular cells throughout the retinal microvasculature
were immunopositive. B, negative control in which a microvascular
complex was prepared for immunocytochemistry in the absence of
the primary antibody. C, negative control in which the primary
antibody was pre-incubated with the antigenic peptide before
exposure of a microvascular complex to the antibody/antigenic
peptide-containing solution. Scale bars: 50 μm.
found on abluminal cells and the endothelium throughout
the retinal microvasculature (Fig. 5), this study assessed
the effect of angiotensin on electrotonic transmission in
secondary and tertiary arterioles, as well as in the capillary
network.
As illustrated in Fig. 6, dual perforated-patch recordings
demonstrated that the Vresponder/Vstimulator ratio transiently decreased during exposure to angiotensin. Using
a similar protocol, Vresponder/Vstimulator ratios at
various interpipette distances were obtained in recordings
from pairs of capillary pericytes (Fig. 7A), of tertiary
arteriolar myocytes (Fig. 7B) and of secondary arteriolar smooth muscle cells (Fig. 7C). Analysis of the
data in Fig. 7 showed that angiotensin caused the
efficacy of axial transmission (Fig. 8A) to decrease
significantly (P < 0.0001) from 0.98 ± 0.03/100 μm to
0.50 ± 0.05/100 μm (n = 6) in the capillaries, from
0.94 ± 0.08/100 μm to 0.52 ± 0.07/100 μm (n = 10) in
the tertiary arterioles, and from 0.94 ± 0.08/100 μm to
0.55 ± 0.11/100 μm (n = 8) in the secondary arterioles. In
contrast, because the extrapolated Vresponder/Vstimulator
ratios at 0 μm were not altered significantly by
angiotensin (Fig. 7), it appears that radial transmission
in capillaries, tertiary arterioles and secondary arterioles was unaffected by this vasoactive molecule (Fig. 8B).
In addition, we did not detect a significant effect of
angiotensin on transmission at the various branch points
within the microvasculature. Thus, these experiments
indicated that angiotensin selectively inhibited axial
transmission.
As shown in Fig. 4D and E, the observed
Vresponder/Vstimulator ratios obtained in the presence
of angiotensin were accurately predicted by our
heterocellular model when the efficacy of axial transmission was selectively decreased. Furthermore, as
illustrated in Fig. 9, calculations that were based
on our heterocellular model (Fig. 4C and E) and
that used the efficacies of transmission derived from
experiments performed under control conditions and
during angiotensin exposure (Table 3) predicted that
angiotensin would profoundly diminish the proximal
spread of a voltage generated within the capillary tree.
Figure 6. Example of an experiment assessing the effect of angiotensin on electrotonic transmission
A, photomicrograph showing the sites at which perforated-patch pipettes were sealed onto a capillary pericyte and
the myocyte of tertiary arteriole. Scale bar: 50 μm. B, plot of the Vresponder/Vstimulator ratio versus time. Each
point is the mean of 3 successive sweeps. A depolarizing current was injected via the recording pipette that was
sealed onto a capillary pericyte. Bar shows when 500 nM angiotensin was added to the perfusate. C, voltage traces
from a current-injected capillary pericyte and from a myocyte on the tertiary arteriole when the bathing solution
lacked angiotensin. D, voltage traces from the capillary pericyte and the myocyte on the secondary arteriole during
exposure of the microvascular complex to angiotensin.
C 2011 The Authors. Journal compilation C 2011 The Physiological Society
J Physiol 589.9 Electrotonic architecture of the retinal microvasculature 2393
Figure 7. Vresponder/Vstimulator ratios versus the distance between a pair of recording sites on microvessels during exposure to 500 nM angiotensin
A, ratios for recordings from pairs of pericytes located on capillaries. B, ratios for dual recordings from pairs of
myocytes located on tertiary arterioles. C, ratios for dual recordings from pairs of smooth muscle cells located
on secondary arterioles. For each panel, the first-order exponential fit is shown. Also shown in each panel is the
first-order exponential fit for the Vresponder/Vstimulator ratios obtained under control conditions and plotted in
Fig. 3.
Effect of angiotensin on the I–V relations of isolated
capillaries and arterioles
In addition to quantifying the effect of angiotensin on
the transmission of voltages generated by the injection
of current, we wished to assess how angiotensin affected
the spread of a physiological input. To do this, we used
single perforated-patch recordings to measure the change
in current–voltage relationsinduced by angiotensin,which
is known to activate a non-specific cation conductance
in the retinal microvasculature (Kawamura et al. 2004).
For an initial series of experiments, microvascular
complexes were transected at the capillary–tertiary
arteriole junction and/or at the junction of the tertiary and
secondary arterioles. In this way, we could obtain single
perforated-patch recordings from abluminal cells located
on isolated segments of capillaries, tertiary arterioles and
secondary arterioles.
Figure 8. Effect of angiotensin on electrotonic transmission in the retinal microvasculature
A, efficacies of axial transmission under control conditions and in the presence of 500 nM angiotensin. For each
microvascular region, dual perforated-patch recordings were made from abluminal cells, i.e. pericytes of the
capillaries, myocytes of the tertiary arterioles and encircling smooth muscle cells of the secondary arterioles.
The number of dual perforated-patch experiments for each group is shown in Table 3. For each microvascular
region, angiotensin significantly (∗P < 0.0001) decreased the efficacy of axial transmission. B, efficacies of radial
transmission under control conditions and in the presence of 500 nM angiotensin. Perforated-patch recordings
were as described in panel A, and the number of dual perforated-patch experiments for each group is shown in
Table 3. For each microvascular region, angiotensin did not significantly change the efficacy of radial transmission.
C 2011 The Authors. Journal compilation C 2011 The Physiological Society
2394 T. Zhang and others J Physiol 589.9
Table 3. Efficacies of electrotonic transmission at various sites within the retinal microvasculature
Efficacy of transmission Efficacy of transmission
Site within the retinal microvasculature under control conditions in angiotensin
Capillary
Axial transmission
Non-branching regions 0.98 ± 0.03/100 μm (n = 27) 0.50 ± 0.07/100 μm (n = 6)∗
Branch points 1.12 ± 0.16 (n = 6) 1.11 ± 0.08 (n = 3)
Radial transmission 0.76 ± 0.05 (n = 27) 0.76 ± 0.05 (n = 6)
Capillary/tertiary arteriole branch point 0.57 ± 0.08 (n = 8) 0.62 ± 0.19 (n = 4)
Secondary arteriole
Axial transmission
Non-branching regions 0.94 ± 0.08/100 μm (n = 29) 0.52 ± 0.07/100 μm (n = 10)∗
Branch points 1.00 ± 0.10 (n = 16) 1.14 ± 0.07(n = 3)
Radial transmission 0.54 ± 0.04 (n = 29) 0.59 ± 0.08 (n = 10)
Tertiary arteriole/secondary arteriole branch point 0.62 ± 0.05 (n = 7) 0.54 ± 0.12 (n = 4)
Secondary arteriole
Axial transmission
Non-branching regions 0.94 ± 0.08/100 μm (n = 10) 0.55 ± 0.11 (n = 8)∗
Radial transmission 0.47 ± 0.06 (n = 10) 0.45 ± 0.13 (n = 8)
Values are derived from the data shown in Figs. 3 and 7 and in Tables 1 and 2. The n values are the number of pairs of perforated-patch
recordings. Asterisks indicate that angiotensin significantly decreased the efficacy of axial transmission in the capillaries (P < 0.0001),
the tertiary arterioles (P = 0.0057) and the secondary arterioles (P = 0.0097); at other microvascular sites, the transmission efficacy was
not significantly affected by angiotensin.
Figure 9. Predicted voltage decay within the retinal
microvasculature under control conditions and in the presence
of angiotensin
The vertical axis shows the relative voltage changes predicted to
occur in abluminal cells during the spread of a relative voltage of
1.45 that was generated in the endothelium of a capillary at a site
400 μm distal to the capillary–tertiary arteriole junction. Relative
voltages in abluminal cells were calculated at 100 μm intervals based
on the heterocellular models illustrated in Fig. 4C and E and with the
use of the efficacies of radial transmission, of axial transmission and
of transmission at branch points listed in Table 3. Our heterocellular
model of the electrotonic architecture of the retinal microvasculature
predicts that the amount of a capillary-generated voltage spreading
into and through the proximal arterioles is markedly decreased
during exposure to angiotensin.
We found that during exposure to angiotensin, the
transected capillaries generated a current that was
inward at physiological membrane potentials and caused
depolarization (Fig. 10A). In contrast, the current–voltage
relations of transected tertiary arterioles and transected secondary arterioles were minimally affected by
angiotensin (Fig. 10B and C). From these experiments,
we concluded that the angiotensin-induced conductance
is generated predominantly by the capillaries; little
is generated by the arterioles. We also concluded
from these observations that the lack a significant
angiotensin-induced current in the arterioles indicates
that a decrease in membrane resistance is not required
in order for angiotensin to decrease the efficacy of axial
transmission.
Effect of angiotensin on intact microvascular
complexes
The finding that the angiotensin-induced current is
generated predominately in the capillaries led to additional
experiments designed to test the prediction of our
heterocellular model (Fig. 9) that angiotensin’s inhibition
of axial transmission would minimize the spread of a
capillary-generated current. In these experiments, single
perforated-patch pipettes were sealed onto the capillaries,
tertiary arterioles and secondary arterioles of intact microvascular complexes, and I–V relations were determined
before and during exposure to angiotensin. As detailed
in Methods, the angiotensin-induced NSC conductance
C 2011 The Authors. Journal compilation C 2011 The Physiological Society
J Physiol 589.9 Electrotonic architecture of the retinal microvasculature 2395
was quantified at –103 mV. As summarized in Fig. 11,
the angiotensin-induced conductances detected in the
tertiary and secondary arterioles were not significantly
different in recordingsmadefrom intact, as compared with
transected, microvascular complexes. Thus, consistent
with angiotensin potently attenuating axial transmission,
essentially none of the angiotensin-induced current
generated in the capillaries spread to the proximal microvasculature.
Discussion
To better understand the functional organization of the
retinal microvasculature, we used dual perforated-patch
recordings to characterize the electrotonic architecture of
microvascular complexes freshly isolated from the adult
rat retina. These experiments revealed that a voltage
spreading axially along a capillary, a tertiary arteriole or a
secondary arteriole is transmitted efficiently with a rate of
decay of only ∼5% per 100 μm. However, our analysis
also demonstrated that the retinal microvasculature is
not simply a well-coupled syncytium. Rather, voltage is
attenuated by ∼45% as it spreads from a branch of the
capillary network to a tertiary arteriole and also as it
passes from a tertiary arteriole to the proximal secondary
arteriole. Our dual recording data also led us to infer that
radial transmission between an abluminal cell and the
underlying endothelium is not as efficient as axial transmission through the endothelium.
In this study, we also used dual recordings to assess
the effect of angiotensin II on electrotonic transmission.
These experiments indicated that this vasoactive molecule
selectively inhibits axial transmission. Thus, the electrotonic architecture of the retinal microvasculature is not
static, but rather can be dynamically modulated by vasoactive signals.
Comparison of retinal and non-retinal vasculatures
How does the electrotonic architecture of retinal microvasculature compare with the functional organization
of other vascular systems? A key finding of our
dual recording experiments is that the axial spread
of voltage within retinal capillaries, tertiary arterioles
and secondary arterioles is highly efficient. Although
there appear to be no previous dual recording studies
directly assessing electrotonic transmission within a
capillary–arteriole complex, our finding of efficient axial
transmission in retinal microvessels is consistent with
studies demonstrating in non-retinal tissues that the
Figure 10. Effect of angiotensin on current–voltage relations recorded from capillaries, tertiary arterioles and secondary arterioles
A, averaged I–V plots generated from single perforated-patch recordings made from 8 pericyte located on
capillaries whose connections with tertiary arterioles had been transected. ◦, before angiotensin; , during
exposure to 500 nM angiotensin. At each tested voltage from –38 mV to –108 mV, the inward current was
significantly (P < 0.0001) larger during exposure to angiotensin; at 12 mV and 22 mV, the outward current during
angiotensin exposure was significantly (P < 0.05) larger. B, averaged I–V plots generated from perforated-patch
recordings made from 6 myocytes located on tertiary arterioles whose connections with capillaries and secondary
arterioles had been transected. ◦, before angiotensin; , during exposure to 500 nM angiotensin. Angiotensin did
not significantly affect the current amplitude. C, averaged I–V plots generated from perforated-patch recordings
made from 3 smooth muscle cells located on secondary arterioles whose connections with tertiary arterioles
had been transected. ◦, before angiotensin; , during exposure to 500 nM angiotensin. Angiotensin did not
significantly affect the current amplitude.
C 2011 The Authors. Journal compilation C 2011 The Physiological Society
2396 T. Zhang and others J Physiol 589.9
application of voltage-changing chemicals onto a capillary
can elicit vasomotor responses in proximal arterioles
(Dietrich, 1989; Song & Tyml, 1993; Berg et al. 1997;
Beach et al. 1998; McGahren et al. 1998). Furthermore,
the voltage decay rate of ∼5%/100 μm within the
retinal microvasculature is similar to the rate of decay
for axial transmission through larger vessels in the
circulatory system (Hirst & Neild, 1978; Emerson et al.
2002). In addition, our finding that a voltage spreads
with a conduction velocity of ∼50 mm s−1 along retinal
capillaries, tertiary arterioles and secondary arterioles is
similar to the velocities reported for larger vessels, such
as those located in the ureter (23 mm s−1) (Tsuchiya &
Takein, 1990), retractor muscle (∼45 mm s−1) (Emerson
et al. 2002) and small intestine (∼85 mm s−1) (Stevens
et al. 2000). Thus, rapid and efficient axial transmission
may be a feature, not only of the retinal microvasculature,
but of the circulatory system in general.
In contrast to the apparent universality of highly
efficient axial transmission, the efficacy of radial transmission varies widely. For example, in guinea-pig
mesenteric secondary arterioles, the efficacy of transmission between an abluminal smooth muscle and the
Figure 11. Angiotensin-induced non-specific cation (NSC)
conductance density in capillaries, tertiary arterioles and
secondary arterioles, which were part of an intact
microvascular complex or that had been transected from the
rest of the microvascular plexus
For the capillary groups, 8 recordings were from pericytes located on
transected capillaries, and 6 were from pericytes on capillaries of
intact microvascular complexes. For the tertiary arteriole groups, 6
recordings were from myocytes located on transected tertiary
arterioles, and 5 were from myocytes on tertiary arterioles of intact
microvascular complexes. For the secondary arteriole groups, 3
recordings were from smooth muscle cells encircling transected
secondary arterioles, and 4 were from smooth muscle cells on
secondary arterioles of intact microvascular complexes. For each
portion of the microvasculature, the angiotensin-induced
non-specific cation conductance density was not significantly
different in intact and transected microvessels.
endothelium is only ∼6% (Yamamoto et al. 2001), while
radial myoendothelial coupling is reported to be robust in
arteries of the hamster retractor muscle (Emerson et al.
2002). Between these extremes, our study indicated the
efficacy of radial transmission is 76% in the capillaries,
54% in the tertiary arterioles and 47% in the secondary
arterioles (Table 3).
Another aspect of the electrotonic architecture that
appears to vary within the circulatory system is the efficacy
of transmission between abluminal cells. While transmission along the smooth muscle layer of hamster cheek
pouch arteries is reported to be quite efficient (Bartlett &
Segal, 2000; Budel et al. 2003), a current injected into a
smooth muscle cell of a mesenteric secondary arteriole
was found to dissipate by ∼90% after spreading just
25 μm along the abluminal layer (Yamamoto et al. 2001).
Similarly, our model-based analysis of dual recording
experiments indicates that abluminal cell–abluminal cell
is, at most, only a minor pathway for the spread of voltage
within the retinal microvasculature.
At present, it is uncertain whether the electrotonic
architecture at non-retinal locations in the circulatory
system is static or is dynamic. Since angiotensin’s
inhibition of axial transmission is a newly recognized
action of this vasoactive molecule, it is not known whether
this vasoactive signal modulates electrotonic transmission
elsewhere. With extensive documentation that the efficacy
of voltage spread is not uniform within the system, it
is clearly risky to extrapolate the findings of our study to
non-retinal tissues. In fact, it is imperative that the electrotonic architecture be characterized for each vascular bed.
Functional specialization within the retinal
microvasculature
Characterization of the electrotonic architecture of the
retinal microvasculature provided further support for the
emerging concept that there is functional specialization
within this operational unit. Specifically, our finding that
radial transmission between an abluminal cell and the endothelium is significantly more efficient in the capillaries
than in the arterioles supports our proposal (Matsushita
et al. 2010) that the capillary network is particularly
well adapted for generating and transmitting an electrophysiological response to a vasoactive signal. Consistent
with this functional concept, the relative efficacy of radial
transmission in the capillaries results in a substantial
majority of the voltage generated in a pericyte being
transmitted to the underlying endothelium, which then
provides a highly effective pathway for proximal transmission. In addition to having the highest efficacy of radial
transmission, capillaries are known to have physiological
attributes that enhance their ability to generate a voltage
change in response to vasoactive signals. For example,
C 2011 The Authors. Journal compilation C 2011 The Physiological Society
J Physiol 589.9 Electrotonic architecture of the retinal microvasculature 2397
because functional KATP channels are chiefly located in the
capillaries, this portion of the microvasculature generates
almost all of the hyperpolarizing KATP current induced
by adenosine (Ishizaki et al. 2009). In addition, because
capillaries have a relatively small outward KIR conductance
(Matsushita & Puro, 2006) and thereby a highermembrane
resistance, a change in ion channel activity induced
by a vasoactive signal evokes a relatively large voltage
change. On the other hand, although capillaries effectively
generate and transmit voltages, their dearth of functional
voltage-dependent calcium channels (VDCCs) prevents
VDCC-dependent vasomotor responses from occurring
in the capillary network (Ishizaki et al. 2009). Rather,
the capillary’s specialization for generating and transmitting voltages is complemented by the proximal microvasculature’s abundance of VDCCs (Matsushita et al.
2010),which can convert a capillary-generated voltageinto
a change in abluminal cell calcium and, thereby, changes
in abluminal cell contractility, lumen diameter and blood
flow.
Effect of branch points on electrotonic transmission
This study also established that at some, but not all,
branch points in the retinal microvasculature, there is
significant voltage dissipation. We found that a spreading
voltage dissipates by ∼45% as it passes proximally from
a branch of the capillary network to a tertiary arteriole.
Transmission through the branch point of tertiary and
secondary arterioles also causes a similar attenuation of
voltage. Thus, as deduced previously from the study of
larger, i.e. 50–75 μm diameter, arterioles of the ileal submucosa (Segal & Neild, 1996), the effect of branch points
must be considered in an analysis of how voltage flows
through a microvascular network. On the other hand, our
study indicated that not all classes of branch points within
the retinal microvasculature had a detectable impact on
the spread of voltage. Specifically, in our dual recording
experiments, the efficacy of distal-to-proximal transmission was not significantly affected by intra-capillary
or intra-arteriole branches. At present, an explanation for
the differing effects of branch points within the retinal
microvasculature awaits further study, although it appears
likely that the relative diameters (Segal & Neild, 1996)
and capacitative loads of the parent and daughter vessels
may determine how much, if any, voltage dissipation
occurs. Also awaiting determination is the functional
consequence of the voltage dissipation that occurs at
the capillary–tertiary arteriole junction and also at the
junction of tertiary and secondary arterioles. Our working
hypothesis is that a transmission efficacy of <1.0 at the site
where sister branches converge enhances the ability of the
proximal vessel to integrate inputs from these distal sites.
Angiotensin-induced inhibition of electrotonic
transmission
An important operational concept established by this
study is that angiotensin modulates the electrotonic
architecture of the retinal microvasculature. Previously, we
raised this possibility based on voltage-clamp recordings
showing that a decrease in the membrane capacitance
(Cm) is associated with exposure of retinal capillaries to
angiotensin. However, because a change in Cm provides,
at best, only a grossly qualitative indication of the
extent of coupling within a population of cells (Zhao
& Santos-Sacchi, 1998), does not allow determination of
transmission efficacies, cannot distinguish effects on radial
and/or axial transmission and is affected by membrane
events unrelated to intercellular communication (Gillis,
1995), it was necessary to use a more specific and sensitive
assay. To eliminate the ambiguity of a Cm assay, the
present study quantified electrotonic transmission
between a pair of current-clamped recording pipettes. We
found that during exposure to angiotensin, the rate at
which a voltage decays as it spreads along a capillary,
tertiary arteriole or secondary arteriole is increased
from ∼5%/100 μm to ∼50%/100 μm. Indicative that
angiotensin selectively inhibits axial transmission, neither
the efficacy of radial transmission between abluminal cells
and the endothelium nor transmission at branch points
between a capillary and a tertiary arteriole or between a
tertiary and secondary arteriole was significantly affected
by this vasoactive molecule.
Although the widespread effect of angiotensin on axial
transmission in the retinal microvasculature is consistent
with our finding that AT1 angiotensin receptors are
expressed throughout this microvascular complex, the
mechanism by which angiotensin inhibits axial transmission is uncertain. However, our experiments indicate
that this effect does not require a change in the membrane
resistance since exposure to angiotensin caused a 10-fold
decrease in the efficacy of axial transmission not only in
the capillaries where angiotensin induces a non-specific
cation conductance, but also in the arterioles where only
small currents are activated by this vasoactive molecule.
What are the functional consequences of angiotensin’s
inhibition of axial transmission? An operational result is
that the electrophysiological response of the capillaries
to angiotensin remains highly localized. Specifically, our
recordings from intact and transected microvascular
complexes demonstrated that the depolarization caused by
angiotensin’s activation of non-specific cation channels in
the capillary network remains confined to the capillaries. It
seems probable that in the presence of angiotensin, voltage
changes generated in the capillaries by other vasoactive
molecules (Puro, 2007) would also be prevented from
spreading proximally. In this way, input to a capillary may
evoke a local, rather than a global, change in blood flow.
C 2011 The Authors. Journal compilation C 2011 The Physiological Society
2398 T. Zhang and others J Physiol 589.9
Based on these experimentally derived considerations, we
propose that the action of angiotensin to inhibit axial
transmission allows this vasoactive signal to regulate the
geographical extent of the microvasculature’s response to
voltage-changing inputs.
Isolated retinal microvascular complexes: advantages
and caveats
This analysis of the electrotonic architecture of the retinal
microvasculature was based on the study of freshly isolated microvascular complexes. With this experimental
preparation, it was relatively straightforward to obtain
dual perforated-patch recordings from abluminal cells
located at well defined locations in a retinal microvascular complex. Also, the ability to transect an isolated
microvascular complex at the capillary–tertiary arteriole
junction and also at the tertiary arteriole–secondary
arteriole junction permitted detection of currents
generated within the capillaries, tertiary arterioles or
secondary arterioles. Furthermore, use of isolated microvessels allowed us to assess the effect of angiotensin in the
absence of confounding effects mediated via non-vascular
cells. However, although recordings from endothelial cells
would have helped in our assessment of electrotonic transmission, this proved impractical since the vascular endothelium is extensively covered by abluminal cells whose
anatomy and function were disrupted during the process
of sealing a pipette onto an endothelial cell. Also, the
technique of internal perfusion of retinal microvessels
with toxic chemicals to selectively kill the endothelial cells
has yet to be perfected. In addition, since the isolated
microvessels were not internally perfused, the effects of
intralumnial pressure on electrotonic transmission were
not evaluated in this study. In the future, as additional
quantitative data concerning the retinal microvascular
become available, a better understanding of the physiology
of this operational unit can be gained by the formulation
of a detailed computational model, as has been done
for skeletal muscle resistance arteries (Diep et al. 2005).
Also awaiting future study is the characterization of the
specific connexins that constitute the homocellular and
heterocellular gap junction pathways within the retinal
microvasculature. Future studies should also assess how
the electrotonic architecture of the microvasculature of
the retina is affected by diabetes, which disrupts gap
junction function in the retinal microvessels (Oku et al.
2001) and causes sight-threatening complications that
involve, at least in part, the retina’s renin–angiotensin
system (Fletcher et al. 2010). Finally, it must be noted
that the conclusions based on this study of isolated vessels
require in vivo verification, although technical advances
will be required in order to assess electrotonic transmission
within the retinal microvasculature in vivo.
Conclusions
In summary, this study has shown that the electrotonic architecture of the retinal microvasculature is
characterized by highly efficient axial transmission within
the capillaries, tertiary arterioles and secondary arterioles. On other hand, radial abluminal cell-to-endothelium
transmission, as well as transmission at branch points
between a capillary and its tertiary arteriole and between
a tertiary arteriole and its secondary arteriole, is
significantly less efficient. This study has also established
that angiotensin selectively and profoundly inhibits
axial transmission within capillaries, tertiary arterioles and secondary arterioles. As a consequence, the
angiotensin-induced depolarization generated in the
capillaries remains localized to the capillary network
and fails to spread to the calcium channel-rich proximal
portions of the microvasculature. Of general physiological
importance, angiotensin’s inhibition of axial transmission
establishes the operational concept that the electrotonic architecture of the retinal microvasculature is not
static, but rather is dynamically modulated by vasoactive
signals.
References
Bartlett I & Segal SS (2000). Resolution of smooth muscle and
endothelial pathways for conduction along hamster cheek
pouch arterioles. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 278,
H604–H612.
Beach JM, McGahren ED & Duling BR (1998). Capillaries and
arterioles are electrically coupled in hamster cheek pouch.
Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 275, H1489–1496.
Berg BR, Cohen KD & Sarelius IH (1997). Direct coupling
between blood flow and metabolism at the capillary level in
striated muscle. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 272,
H2693–2700.
Budel S, Bartlett I & Segal SS (2003). Homocellular conduction
along endothelium and smooth muscle of arterioles in
hamster cheek pouch: unmasking an NO wave. Circ Res 93,
61–68.
Cohen KD, Berg BR & Sarelius IH (2000). Remote arteriolar
dilations in response to muscle contraction under capillaries.
Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 278, H1916–1923.
Diep H, Vigmond E, Segal SS & Welsh D (2005). Defining
electrical communication in skeletal muscle resistance
arteries: a computational approach. J Physiol 568, 267–281.
Dietrich HH (1989). Effect of locally applied epinephrine and
norepinephrine on blood flow and diameter in capillaries of
rat mesentery. Microvasc Res 38, 125–135.
Drummond GB (2009). Reporting ethical matters in The
Journal of Physiology: standards and advice. J Physiol 587,
713–719.
Emerson G, Neild TO & Segal SS (2002). Conduction of
hyperpolarization along hamster feed arteries: augmentation
by acetylcholine. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 282,
H102–H109.
C 2011 The Authors. Journal compilation C 2011 The Physiological Society
J Physiol 589.9 Electrotonic architecture of the retinal microvasculature 2399
Fletcher EL, Phipps JA, Ward MM, Vessey KA &
Wilkerson-Berka JL (2010). The renin-angiotensin system in
retinal health and disease: Its influence on neurons, glia and
the vasculature. Prog Retin Eye Res 29, 284–311.
Gillis KD (1995). Techniques for membrane capacitance
measurements. In Single-Channel Recording. ed. Sakmann B
& Neher E, pp. 155–198. Plenum, New York.
Hirschi KK & D’Amore PA (1996). Pericytes in the
microvasculature. Cardiovasc Res 32, 687–698.
Hirst GD & Neild TO (1978). An analysis of excitatory
junctional potentials recorded from arterioles. J Physiol 80,
87–104.
Ishizaki E, Fukumoto M & Puro DG (2009). Functional KATP
channels in the rat retinal microvasculature: topographical
distribution, redox regulation, spermine modulation and
diabetic alteration. J Physiol 587, 2233–2253.
Joyce NC, Haire MF & Palade GE (1985). Contractile proteins
in pericytes. I. Immunoperoxidase localization of
tropomyosin. J Cell Biol 100, 1379–1386.
Kawamura H, Kobayashi M, Li Q, Yamanishi S, Katsumura K,
Minami M, Wu DM & Puro DG (2004). Effects of
angiotensin II on the pericyte-containing microvasculature
of the rat retina. J Physiol 561, 671–683.
Kawamura H, Oku H, Li Q, Sakagami K & Puro DG (2002).
Endothelin-induced changes in the physiology of retinal
pericytes. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 43, 882–888.
Kawamura H, Sugiyama T, Wu DM, Kobayashi M, Yamanishi
S, Katsumura K & Puro DG (2003). ATP: a vasoactive signal
in the pericyte-containing microvasculature of the rat retina.
J Physiol 551, 787–799.
Kuwabara T & Cogan D (1960). Studies of retinal vascular
patterns. Part I. Normal architecture. Arch Ophthalmol 64,
904–911.
Matsushita K, Fukumoto, M, Kobayashi T, Kobayashi M,
Ishizaki E, Minami M, Katsumura K, Liao SD, Wu DM,
Zhang T & Puro DG (2010). Diabetes-induced inhibition of
voltage-dependent calcium channels in the retinal
microvasculature: role of spermine. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci
51, 5979–5990.
Matsushita K & Puro DG (2006). Topographical heterogeneity
of KIR currents in pericyte-containing microvessels of the rat
retina: effect of diabetes. J Physiol 573, 483–495.
McGahren ED, Beach JM & Duling BR (1998). Capillaries
demonstrate changes in membrane potential in response to
pharmacological stimuli. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 274,
H60–65.
Oku H, Kodama T, Sakagami K & Puro DG (2001).
Diabetes-induced disruption of gap junction pathways
within the retinal microvasculature. Invest Ophthalmol Vis
Sci 42, 1915–1920.
Peppiatt CM, Howarth C, Mobbs P & Attwell D (2006).
Bidirectional control of CNS capillary diameter by pericytes.
Nature 443, 700–704.
Puro DG (2007). Physiology and pathobiology of the
pericyte-containing retinal microvasculature: new
developments. Microcirculation 14, 1–10.
Sakagami K, Wu DM & Puro DG (1999). Physiology of rat
retinal pericytes: modulation of ion channel activity by
serum-derived molecules. J Physiol 521, 637–650.
Schonfelder U, Hofer A, Paul M & Funk RH (1998). In situ
observation of living pericytes in rat retinal capillaries.
Microvasc Res 56, 22–29.
Segal SS & Neild TO (1996). Conducted depolarization in
arteriole networks of the guinea-pig small intestine: effect of
branching of signal dissipation. J Physiol 496, 229–244.
Shepro D & Morel NM (1993). Pericyte physiology. FASEB J 7,
1031–1038.
Song H & Tyml K (1993). Evidence for sensing and integration
of biological signals by the capillary network. Am J Physiol
Heart Circ Physiol 265, H1235–1242.
Stevens RJ, Publicover NG & Smith TK (2000). Propagation
and neural regulation of calcium waves in longitundinal and
circular muscle layers of guinea pig small intestine.
Gastroenterology 118, 892–904.
Tilton RG (1991). Capillary pericytes: perspectives and future
trends. J Electron Microsc Tech 19, 327–344.
Tsuchiya T & Takei N (1990). Pressure responses and
conduction of peristaltic wave in guinea-pig ureter. Jpn J
Physiol 40, 139–149.
Wu DM, Miniami M, Kawamura H & Puro DG (2006).
Electrotonic transmission within pericyte-containing retinal
microvessels. Microcirculation 13, 353–363.
Yamamoto Y, Klemm M, Edwards FR & Suzuki H (2001).
Intercellular electrical communication among smooth
muscle and endothelial cells in guinea-pig mesenteric
arterioles. J Physiol 535, 181–195.
Zhao HB & Santos-Sacchi J (1998). Effect of membrane tension
on gap junctional conductance of supporting cells in Corti’s
organ. J Gen Physiol 112, 447–455.
Author contributions
All experiments were performed at the University of Michigan
by T.Z. and D.W.; they also contributed to the design of
experiments, the analysis of data and the critical review of drafts
of the manuscript. G.X. contributed to project planning and
manuscript review. D.G.P. led in the conception and design of
the project, in the analysis of the data, and in the writing of the
manuscript. All authors gave final approval of the version to be
published.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank Bret Hughes for helpful discussions. David
Reed provided aid with statistical analysis. This project was
supported by Grants EY12505 and EY07003 from the National
Institutes of Health.
C 2011 The Authors. Journal compilation C 2011 The Physiological Society


J Physiol 589.9 (2011) pp 2383–2399 2383
The Journal of Physiology
The electrotonic architecture of the retinal
microvasculature: modulation by angiotensin II
Ting Zhang1,2, David M. Wu2, Ge-zhi Xu1 and Donald G. Puro2,3
1
Department of Ophthalmology, Eye and ENT Hospital, Shanghai Medical School, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
2
Department of Ophthalmology & Visual Sciences, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA
3
Department of Molecular & Integrative Physiology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA
Non-technical summary In the quest to understand how the circulatory system adjusts microvascular function to meet local metabolic demand, we focused on the retina whose circulatory
system consists exclusively of microvessels. Since voltages induced by extracellular signals play a
key role in generating vasomotor responses, we characterized the movement of voltage within the
retinal microvasculature. To do this, we quantified voltage transmission between pairs of recording
pipettes located at well-defined sites in capillary/arteriole plexuses freshly isolated from the rat
retina. We found that the retinal microvasculature is not simply a homogeneous syncytium,
but has a complex electrotonic architecture with differing efficacies of voltage transmission.
Furthermore, we discovered that the electrotonic architecture is not static, but is modulated by
angiotensin. This newly appreciated action reveals that vasoactive signals can alter the functional
organization of the microvasculature and, thereby, regulate the spatial extent of the circulatory
system’s response to voltage-changing inputs.
Abstract The capillary/arteriole complex is the key operational unit regulating local perfusion
to meet metabolic demand. However, much remains to be learned about how this multicellular
unit is functionally organized. To help address this challenge, we characterized the electrotonic architecture of the retinal microvasculature, which is particularly well adapted for the
decentralized control of blood flow. In this study, we quantified the transmission of voltage
between pairs of perforated-patch pipettes sealed onto abluminal cells located on microvascular
complexes freshly isolated from the adult rat retina. These complexes consisted of capillaries,
as well as tertiary and secondary arterioles. Dual recording experiments revealed that voltage
spreading axially through a capillary, tertiary arteriole or secondary arteriole is transmitted very
efficiently with a decay rate of only ∼5% per 100 μm. However, the retinal microvasculature is
not simply a well-coupled syncytium since we detected significant voltage dissipation with radial
abluminal cell-to-endothelium transmission and also at branch points between a capillary and its
tertiary arteriole and between tertiary and secondary arterioles. Consistent with capillaries being
particularly well-suited for the task of transmitting voltages induced by vasoactive signals, radial
transmission is most efficient in this portion of the retinal microvasculature. Dual recordings also
revealed that angiotensin II potently inhibits axial transmission. As a functional consequence, the
geographical extent of the microvasculature’s response to voltage-changing inputs is markedly
restricted in the presence of angiotensin. In addition, this effect of angiotensin established that the
electrotonic architecture of the retinal microvasculature is not static, but rather, is dynamically
modulated by vasoactive signals.
(Received 18 November 2010; accepted after revision 1 March 2011; first published online 8 March 2011)
Corresponding author D. G. Puro: Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, University of Michigan, 1000
Wall Street, Ann Arbor, MI 48105, USA. Email: dgpuro@umich.edu
Abbreviations AT1, angiotensin receptor type 1; Cm, membrane capacitance; KATP, ATP-sensitive potassium channel;
KIR, inwardly rectifying potassium channel; NSC, non-specific cation; VDCC, voltage-dependent calcium channel
C 2011 The Authors. Journal compilation C 2011 The Physiological Society DOI: 10.1113/jphysiol.2010.202937
2384 T. Zhang and others J Physiol 589.9
Introduction
Capillaries may play a more active role in the regulation of
blood flow than traditionally thought (Beach et al. 1998;
McGahren et al. 1998; Schonfelder et al. 1998; Peppiatt
et al. 2006; Puro, 2007). Significant progress in establishing
this previously unappreciated function for capillaries has
come from studies of the retinal vasculature. In the quest
to better understand how local perfusion is regulated,
investigators have focused on the circulatory system of
the retina since it appears to be particularly well adapted
for the decentralized control of blood flow. Indicative of
this adaptation, retinal capillaries possess a high density of
abluminally positioned pericytes (Shepro & Morel, 1993),
which have a number ofmyocyte-like characteristics (Joyce
et al. 1985; Tilton, 1991; Shepro & Morel, 1993; Hirschi &
D’Amore, 1996) and whose contractions alter the capillary
lumen (Schonfelder et al. 1998; Kawamura et al. 2003;
Peppiatt et al. 2006; Puro, 2007) and thereby may affect
local perfusion.
Evidence is accumulating that the retinal microvasculature is an interactive complex that includes a
network of capillaries and a tertiary arteriole that links the
capillaries with a secondary arteriole. Consistent with this
operational concept, gap junction pathways link retinal
capillaries to the proximal microvasculature (Oku et al.
2001). As in the microvasculature of other tissues (Song
& Tyml, 1993; McGahren et al. 1998; Cohen et al. 2000),
a functional manifestation of this interconnectivity is the
observation that voltages generated in the capillaries of
the retina spread efficiently to proximal sites (Ishizaki
et al. 2009). Furthermore, localized electrical stimulation
of a pericyte in the intact retina not only increases the
contractile tone of the stimulated pericyte, but also evokes
contractions in distantly located abluminal cells (Peppiatt
et al. 2006).
Indicative of the complex operational organization of
the retinal microvasculature, recent studies have revealed
functional sub-specialization within this complex. For
example, functional KATP channels are predominately
located in the capillaries (Ishizaki et al. 2009) while
functional voltage-dependent calcium channels (VDCCs)
are chiefly in the proximal portions of the microvasculature (Matsushita et al. 2010). As a consequence,
in order to initiate a VDCC-driven vasomotor response, a
KATP-mediated voltage change generated in the capillaries
must be transmitted proximally via gap junction pathways
(Matsushita et al. 2010).
Despite recent progress in elucidating the
organizational complexity and interactivity of the
retinal microvasculature, much remains to be learned. To
help address this gap in knowledge, a goal of this study was
to quantitatively characterize the electrotonic architecture
of the capillary–tertiary arteriole–secondary arteriole
complex. Another goal was to determine whether the
electrotonic architecture of the retinal microvasculature
is static or whether it is subject to modulation by
extracellular signals, such as angiotensin II. This molecule
was of interest because we previously observed that
exposure of retinal capillaries to angiotensin not only
causes pericytes to contract as stored calcium is released
and calcium-permeable non-specific cation channels are
activated, but also results in a decrease in the membrane
capacitance (Cm), which may reflect a lessening of cell
coupling (Kawamura et al. 2004). However, because Cm
can be affected by membrane changes unrelated to cell
coupling (Gillis, 1995), this study sought to definitively
determine whether angiotensin modulates electrotonic
transmission within the retinal microvasculature.
To characterize the electrotonic architecture of the
retinal microvasculature, we quantified the spread of
depolarization between pairs of perforated-patch pipettes
sealed onto abluminal cells located in microvascular
complexes freshly isolated from the adult rat retina.
These complexes included a secondary arteriole, a tertiary
arteriole and a network of capillaries (Matsushita & Puro,
2006; Ishizaki et al. 2009). An experimental advantage
of this preparation is that it allows analysis of the intact
capillary/arteriole complex, rather than simply capillary
fragments as we studied previously (Wu et al. 2006).
Also, it is easy to visually identify the abluminal cells
of each portion of the retinal microvasculature, i.e. the
pericytes of the capillaries, the myocytes of the tertiary
arterioles and the encircling smooth muscle cells of the
secondary arterioles (Matsushita & Puro, 2006). Thus,
with isolated microvessels, it is relatively straightforward
to quantify electrotonic transmission between a pair of
perforated-patch pipettes that are sealed onto abluminal
cells at two well defined locations within the retinal microvasculature.
In this first characterization of the electrotonic
architecture of the retinal microvasculature, we found
that axial transmission is highly efficient within the
capillaries, tertiary arterioles and secondary arterioles.
However, a significant dissipation of voltage occurs at
the branch point of a capillary and a tertiary arteriole,
as well as at the tertiary arteriole–secondary arteriole
junction. In addition, our experiments showed that voltage
dissipation also occurs with radial transmission between
an abluminal cell and the endothelium. Consistent with
the capillary network being particularly well-suited for
generating and transmitting voltages, radial transmission
is most efficient in this portion of the retinal microvasculature. Importantly, our observation that angiotensin
II selectively and profoundly inhibits axial transmission
lends support for the operational concept that the electrotonic architecture of the retinal microvasculature is not
static, but rather, is dynamically modulated by vasoactive
signals.
C 2011 The Authors. Journal compilation C 2011 The Physiological Society
J Physiol 589.9 Electrotonic architecture of the retinal microvasculature 2385
Methods
Animal use conformed to the guidelines set forth by the
Association for Research in Vision and Ophthalmology
and was approved by the University of Michigan
Committee on the Use and Care of Animals. The
experimental procedures also comply with the polices set
out by The Journal of Physiology (Drummond, 2009). This
study used 76 Long–Evans rats (Charles River, Cambridge,
MA, USA), which were 6–9 weeks old, weighed between
125 and 325 g and included approximately equal numbers
of males and females. The animals were maintained on
a 12 h alternating light–dark cycle and received food
and water ad libitum. Death was induced with a rising
concentration of carbon dioxide.
Microvessel isolation
A tissue print technique (Ishizaki et al. 2009) was used
to isolate microvascular complexes from the retinas of
male and female rats that were 6–9 weeks old. In brief,
the procedure for microvessel isolation included the rapid
removal of retinas, excision of adherent vitreous, and
incubation for ∼24 min at 30◦C in Earle’s balanced salt
solution supplemented with 0.5 mM EDTA, 6 U papain
(Worthington Biochemical Corp., Lakewood, NJ, USA)
and 2 mM cysteine. Subsequently, retinas were placed in
solution A and quadrisected, where solution A consisted
of 140 mM NaCl, 3 mM KCl, 1.8 mM CaCl2, 0.8 mM MgCl2,
10 mM Na-Hepes, 15 mM mannitol, and 5 mM glucose at
pH 7.4 with osmolarity adjusted to 310 mosmol l−1. Each
quadrant of retina was then positioned vitreal-surface-up
onto the glass bottom of a chamber containing solution
A and gently compressed by a glass coverslip (15 mm
diameter, 0.15 mm thick; CS-15R, Warner Instrument
Corp., Hamden, CT, USA) onto which microvascular
complexes adhered. As shown in published photomicrographs (Matsushita & Puro, 2006; Ishizaki et al.
2009) and the schematic diagram in Fig. 1, the isolated
microvascular complexes used in this study included,
from proximal to distal, a secondary arteriole encircled
by a single layer of ‘doughnut-shaped’ smooth muscle
cells, a tertiary arteriole with a layer of ‘dome-shaped’
myocytes at a density of ≥5 somas per 100 μm, and
a capillary network whose abluminal cells, the pericytes, appear as ‘bumps on a log’ (Kuwabara & Cogan,
1960) with a density of ≤4 per 100 μm. As documented
previously (Ishizaki et al. 2009), approximately 200 μm
from its junction with a myocyte-encircled secondary
arteriole, a tertiary arteriole bifurcates into two branches
each of which typically extends another ∼200 μm before
splitting into a pair of capillaries.
Electrophysiology
Experiments were performed at room temperature, i.e.
22–23◦C, within 5 h after microvessel isolation. In some
experiments, a micromanipulator-guided micropipette
was used to transect freshly isolated microvascular
complexes at the capillary–secondary arteriole and the
tertiary arteriole–secondary arteriole junctions. Details
of this transaction technique are available (Ishizaki et al.
2009).
Perforated-patch recordings were made at sites along
a freshly isolated microvessel located on a coverslip
positioned in a recording chamber whose perfusate
was solution A without or with 500 nM angiotensin II.
The solution filling the recording pipettes consisted of
50 mM KCl, 65 mM K2SO4,6mM MgCl2, 10 mM K-Hepes,
60 μg ml−1 amphotericin B and 60 μg ml−1 nystatin at
pH 7.35 and osmolarity 280 mosmol l−1. Recording
pipettes had resistances of ∼5 M and were mounted in
the holder of a patch-clamp amplifier (Axopatch 200B,
Molecular Devices, Sunnyvale, CA, USA or Dagan 3900,
Dagan Corp., Minneapolis, MN, USA). The tip of a
recording pipette was sealed with a resistance of ≥10 G
onto an abluminal cell, i.e. a smooth muscle cell encircling
a secondary arteriole, a myocyte positioned on the wall
of tertiary arteriole or a pericyte located on a capillary.
Figure 1. Schematic diagram showing the portion of the rat
retinal microvasculature isolated by the tissue print procedure
used in this study
In this study, perforated-patch pipettes were sealed onto smooth
muscle cells that encircle secondary arterioles, myocytes that are
positioned on the endothelium of tertiary arterioles and abluminal
pericytes located on the capillaries. Modified from Matsushita et al.
2010 with permission from the Association for Research in Vision
and Ophthalmology.
C 2011 The Authors. Journal compilation C 2011 The Physiological Society
2386 T. Zhang and others J Physiol 589.9
In microvascular complexes isolated by our tissue print
technique, it is straightforward to visually identify these
abluminal cells (Matsushita & Puro, 2006). Of note, to
confirm that recording pipettes could reliably be sealed
onto pericytes and to assess gap junction-mediated interactions of these abluminal cells, we previously (Oku
et al. 2001; Kawamura et al. 2002) used standard
whole-cell pipettes loaded with Neurobiotin, which is
a gap junction-permeant tracer. Under conditions that
inhibit gap junction function, we found that 36 of 36
recording pipettes that were judged by visual inspection to
be sealed onto a capillary pericyte were in fact so located
since only a single pericyte became loaded with Neurobiotin diffusing from the pipette (Oku et al. 2001); endothelial cells were never labelled under conditions in which
gap junctions were closed. Our studies also indicated that
under control conditions, Neurobiotin spreads from a
sampled pericyte to the underlying endothelium (Oku
et al. 2001).
The access resistance for the recordings used in this
study was <25 M. Currents and voltages were filtered
with a four-pole Bessel filter, sampled digitally at 500
or 2000 Hz using a DigiData 1440A acquisition system
(Molecular Devices) and stored by a computer equipped
with pCLAMP (version 10, Molecular Devices), which
along with other software (Origin, v. 8.1, OriginLab Corp.,
Northampton, MA, USA), aided with data analysis and
graphics display. Junction potential adjustment was made
after data collection. The resting membrane potentials
recorded from the capillaries, tertiary arterioles and
secondary arterioles of isolated retinal microvascular
complexes were –43 ± 1 mV (n = 27), –42 ± 1 mV
(n = 29) and –45 ± 1 mV (n = 10), respectively; these
potential were not significantly different. The input
resistance calculated using the change in current
induced by a 20 mV hyperpolarization from a holding
potential of −58 mV was 175 ± 19 M, 151 ± 9 M
and 127 ± 15 M for voltage-clamp recordings from
capillaries, tertiary arterioles and secondary arterioles, respectively; these resistances were not significantly
different.
Dual recording experiments
Dual perforated-patch recordings provided a measure
the efficacy of electrotonic transmission within the
retinal microvasculature. In these experiments, voltages
were monitored via pipettes sealed onto abluminal cells
located at two sites along a microvessel while a 750 ms
step of current was injected at 3 s intervals via one
of the pipettes. For each current step, the ratio of
the voltage change detected at the non-stimulated site
(Vresponder) to the voltage step induced at the site
of current injection (Vstimulator) was calculated. Each
value plotted in Fig. 3 is the mean of at least 30
successive Vresponder/Vstimulator ratios. Because the effect
of angiotensin on the Vresponder/Vstimulator ratio was
transient, the values plotted in Fig. 7 are the average of
the three successive ratios obtained during the maximal
effect of angiotensin on this ratio. First-order exponential
fits of the dual recording data presented in Figs 3 and 7
were made using commercially available software (Origin,
v. 8.1). A photomicrograph of the each studied microvascular complex provided documentation of the location
of each recording pipette in the retinal microvasculature
and aided in the determination of the distance between
the pair of recording pipettes.
Of note, conduction through the bathing solution
did not contribute to the observed Vresponder since
pipette-to-pipette transmission was not detected after
one of the two recording seals was spontaneously lost
or when one of the pipettes was positioned close to,
but not sealed onto, the microvessel. As we observed
previously (Wu et al. 2006), there was no significant
difference in the Vresponder/Vstimulator ratios generated
by a depolarization or a hyperpolarization; neither did
the direction of transmission, i.e. distal to proximal or
proximal to distal, significantly affect this ratio.
To calculate the velocity at which a voltage was
conducted between two recording sites, the interpipette
distance was determined from a photomicrograph of
the sampled microvessel and with the aid of pCLAMP
software, the time interval between the onset of the
depolarization induced in the current-injected cell and
the onset of the depolarization detected at the distant
recording site was determined. For these calculations, dual
recordings with interpipette distances of ≥200 μm were
used.
Single perforated-patch recordings
In some experiments (Figs 10 and 11), voltage steps from
a holding potential of –58 mV were used to generate
current–voltage plots. As done previously (Sakagami et al.
1999; Kawamura et al. 2003; Kawamura et al. 2004),
the amplitude of the non-specific cation current was
measured from recordings in which the voltage was
stepped to –103 mV, which is the K+ equilibrium potential.
For the calculation of conductance densities, membrane
capacitances were determined by the method of Zhao &
Santos-Sacchi (1998).
Immunocytochemistry
Unless otherwise noted, this protocol was performed
at room temperature. After microvessel-containing
coverslips were rinsed in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS)
and fixed with 4% formaldehyde in PBS for 30 min,
endogenous peroxidase activity was blocked by 0.3%
C 2011 The Authors. Journal compilation C 2011 The Physiological Society
J Physiol 589.9 Electrotonic architecture of the retinal microvasculature 2387
hydrogen peroxide in PBS for 30 min. Coverslips were then
exposed overnight at 4◦C to a well-characterized primary
anti-angiotensin receptor type 1 (AT1) antibody (product
no. AAR-011, Alomone Labs, Jerusalem, Israel) that was
diluted 1:100 in PBS supplemented with 1.5% normal
goat serum. Two negative controls were used. In one
control, the primary antibody was omitted. As a second
negative control, the primary antibody was pre-incubated
with the antigen peptide (NSSTEDGIKRIQDDC, which
corresponds to amino acid residues 4–18 of human AT1
receptor) for 1 h preceding application onto microvessels.
After incubation with biotin-conjugated goat anti-rabbit
IgG (1:200, Vector Laboratories, Inc., Burlingame, CA,
USA) for 1 h, coverslips were kept for ∼40 h at
4◦C in a horseradish peroxidase-streptavidin solution
(RTU, Vector Laboratories) and then exposed to the
avidin–biotin–peroxidase complex (1:100, ABC method,
Vector Laboratories) for 30 min. After development of
diaminobenzidine (DAB kit, Vector Laboratories), photomicrographs were taken with differential interference
contrast optics.
Chemicals
Unless otherwise noted, chemicals were obtained from
Sigma-Aldrich (St Louis, MO, USA).
Statistics and data analysis
Data are given as means ± SEM. Probability was evaluated
by Student’s two-tailed t test, unless noted otherwise. For
the comparison of two groups, P ≥ 0.05 indicated lack
of a significant difference. For the statistical comparison
of three groups, the P-value was adjusted using the
Bonferroni correction.
Results
Dual recordings from capillaries, tertiary arterioles
and secondary arterioles
In order to characterize the electrotonic architecture of
the retinal microvasculature, we quantified the spread of
depolarization between pairs of perforated-patch pipettes
sealed onto abluminal cells located on microvascular
complexes freshly isolated from the adult rat retina. Each
complex studied contained a capillary network branching
from a tertiary arteriole that originated from a secondary
arteriole (Fig. 1). An example of such an experiment is
shown in Fig. 2. In the illustrated experiment, a pair of
pipettes was sealed onto myocytes located on a tertiary
arteriole (Fig. 2A and B). The experimental protocol
was to inject a depolarizing current into one of the
monitored myocytes while the change in voltage was
monitored at both recording sites (Fig. 2C). The ratio of
the voltage change measured at the non-stimulated site, i.e.
Vresponder, to the voltage change in the current-injected
cell, i.e. Vstimulator, yielded a measure of the efficacy of
electrotonic transmission between the pair of recording
pipettes.
In a series of dual recording experiments, the
Vresponder/Vstimulator ratios were determined for a range
of interpipette distances within capillaries, tertiary arterioles and secondary arterioles (Fig. 3). As is evident in Fig. 3,
the interpipette distance had only a minimal effect on the
Vresponder/Vstimulator ratio. More specifically, first-order
exponential fits of these data yielded voltage decay rates
of 2 ± 2%/100 μm (n = 27) in the capillaries (Fig. 3A),
6 ± 8%/100 μm (n = 22)in the tertiary arterioles (Fig. 3B)
and 6 ± 8%/100 μm (n = 10) in the secondary arterioles (Fig. 3C); these decay rates were not significantly
different. Based on these findings, we concluded that axial
Figure 2. Example of a dual perforated-patch recording used to measure electrotonic transmission
within a tertiary arteriole
A and B, photomicrographs of the sampled microvessel showing the recording sites on a tertiary arteriole. Scale
bars: 50 μm. C, left, voltage trace recorded by a pipette sealed onto an abluminal myocyte into which a depolarizing
current was injected. Right, the voltage trace recorded via the pipette sealed onto myocyte located on the tertiary
at a distance of 200 μm from the stimulated (current-injected) myoctye. For this pair of recordings from tertiary
arteriolar myocytes, the Vresponder/Vstimulator ratio was 0.34.
C 2011 The Authors. Journal compilation C 2011 The Physiological Society
2388 T. Zhang and others J Physiol 589.9
transmission is highly efficient within the capillaries, the
tertiary arterioles and the secondary arterioles of the
retinal microvasculature.
Models of the electrotonic architecture
of the retinal microvasculature
What is the intercellular pathway by which voltage is
transmitted from a current-injected abluminal cell to
another abluminal cell? One possibility considered was
that electrotonic transmission is predominantly from
abluminal cell-to-abluminal cell. Since the decay of voltage
spreading along this homocellular pathway would be
expected to be, at least approximately, a first-order
process, the extrapolated Vresponder/Vstimulator ratio at
an interpipette distance of 0 μm should be 1.0. However,
in contrast to this expectation, the first-order fits of
the observed Vresponder/Vstimulator ratios shown in
Fig. 3 did not extrapolate to 1.0 at 0 μm. Rather, the
extrapolated ratios at 0 μm were 0.58 ± 0.07, 0.29 ± 0.03
and 0.22 ± 0.04 for capillaries, tertiary arterioles and
secondary arterioles, respectively (Fig. 3). Thus, this
analysis of the Vresponder/Vstimulator data in Fig. 3
indicates that direct abluminal cell-to-abluminal cell
transmission is not likely to be the predominate pathway
for the spread of voltage from a current-injected abluminal
cell.
To further assess putative models for the spread of
voltage through the retinal microvasculature (Fig. 4),
the Vresponder/Vstimulator ratios observed in recordings
from adjacent abluminal cells, i.e. recordings with interpipette distances of ≤20 μm (Fig. 3), were initially used
to calculate the decay of voltage in a model in which axial
transmission was chiefly from abluminal cell to abluminal
cell. In Fig. 4A and B, the observed Vresponder/Vstimulator
ratios are compared with the ratios calculated for homocellular abluminal cell-to-abluminal cell transmission.
As shown in Fig. 4B, the homocellular model predicted
that the Vresponder/Vstimulator ratio at an interpipette
distance of 200 μm would be <0.00. However, this predicted ratio did not accurately match the observed ratio of
0.26 (Fig. 4A). Similarly, we found that this homocellular
model failed to account for the Vresponder/Vstimulator
ratios observed for distantly separated recording pairs in
capillaries and secondary arterioles.
What model can accurately account for the
Vresponder/Vstimulator data presented in Fig. 3? We
considered a heterocellular model in which voltage spreads
from a current-injected abluminal cell via the following
pathway: radially from that abluminal cell to the underlying endothelium, then axially through the endothelial
layer and finally radially from the endothelium to the
distantly located abluminal cell (Fig. 4C). In addition,
in order to account for substantial dissipation of voltage
being detected in dual recordings made at short interpipette distances and only minimal additional decay
with longer interpipette distances (Figs 3 and 4A), our
heterocellular model has relatively inefficient radial transmission and highly efficient axial transmission.
Experimental evidence supports the heterocellular
model. Consistent with there being radial communication
between abluminal cells and the endothelium, we reported
previously that loading the tracer Neurobiotin into
abluminal cells via whole-cell recording pipettes resulted
in the gap junction-dependent spread of this tracer into
and extensively through the endothelial layer of the retinal
microvasculature (Oku et al. 2001; Kawamura et al. 2002).
Also consistent with the heterocellular model in which
axial transmission through the endothelium is highly
efficient, our dual recording experiments indicated that
voltage spreading axially along a retinal microvessel decays
Figure 3. Plots of Vresponder/Vstimulator ratios versus the distance between a pair of recording sites
For each data set, the first-order exponential fit is shown. A, ratios for recordings from pairs of pericytes located
on capillaries. B, ratios for dual recordings from pairs of myocytes located on tertiary arterioles. C, ratios for dual
recordings from pairs of smooth muscle cells that encircled secondary arterioles. The mean of the ratios in panel
A (0.56 ± 0.03) was significantly (P < 0.001) different than those in panels B (0.27 ± 0.02) and C (0.25 ± 0.06);
the ratios in B and C are not significantly different.
C 2011 The Authors. Journal compilation C 2011 The Physiological Society
J Physiol 589.9 Electrotonic architecture of the retinal microvasculature 2389
Figure 4. Models of the electrotonic architecture
Each schematic drawing shows a tertiary arteriole with four
successively located abluminal myoctyes, as well as a myocyte
located 200 μm from the current-injected myocyte. A relative
voltage change of 1.0 was generated in the abluminal cell located
on the extreme left side. Of note, in tertiary arterioles of retinal
microvascular complexes, there are ≥5 myocytes per 100 μm
(Matsushita & Puro, 2006). A, relative voltage changes observed in
dual recordings from tertiary arterioles; data are from Fig. 3B. B,
model of homocellular abluminal cell-to-abluminal cell transmission.
Within each myocyte is shown the relative voltage change calculated
using 0.31 as the efficacy of axial transmission between adjacent
myoctyes; 0.31 was the Vresponder/Vstimulator ratio observed in
dual recordings from adjacent myocytes (Fig. 3B). Comparison of the
calculated ratios shown in this panel with the observed ratios in
panel A shows that this homocellular model failed to adequately
predict the Vresponder/Vstimulator ratio observed at an interpipette
distance of 200 μm. C, heterocellular model for the spread of
voltage from a current-injected abluminal cell. As detailed in the text
and listed in Table 3, the experimentally derived transmission
efficacies used to calculate the relative voltage changes in this
heterocellular model were 0.54 for radial myocyte-to-endothelium
transmission, 0.94/100 μm for axial transmission through the
arteriolar endothelium and 0.54 for endothelium-to-myocyte
transmission at the site of the distantly monitored myocyte. The
Vresponder/Vstimulator ratios calculated using this heterocellular
model closely matched the observed ratios shown in panel A. D,
relative voltage changes observed in dual recordings from tertiary
arterioles during exposure to angiotensin; data are from Fig. 7B. E,
heterocellular model in the presence of angiotensin. As detailed in
only ∼5% per 100 μm (Fig. 3). Also consistent with
our heterocellular model, dual recording experiments
indicated that radial transmission is less efficient. Namely,
a parsimonious explanationfor the Vresponder/Vstimulator
ratios in Fig. 3 extrapolating to <1.0 at 0 μm is that
the extrapolated ratio reflects the dissipation of voltage
during radial abluminal cell/endothelium transmission
at the current-injected site and also at the distantly
recorded site. Thus, for capillaries, the extrapolated
Vresponder/Vstimulator ratio of 0.58 ± 0.07 at the interpipette distance of 0 μm (Fig. 3A) is the product of the
transmission efficacy of 0.76 ± 0.05 for the passage of
voltage from a current-injected pericyte to the underlying
endothelium and 0.76 ± 0.05 for the passage of voltage
from the endothelium to the distantly monitored pericyte,
i.e. the overall transmission efficacy for these two radial
transmission steps is 0.76 × 0.76 = 0.58. Similarly for
tertiary arterioles, the extrapolated Vresponder/Vstimulator
ratio of 0.29 ± 0.03 at the interpipette distance of
0 μm (Fig. 3B) yields a radial transmission efficacy of
0.54 ± 0.04. For secondary arterioles, the extrapolated
value of 0.22 ± 0.04 (Fig. 3C) yields a radial transmission efficacy of 0.47 ± 0.06. Of note, these efficacies for
radial transmission in the arterioles were not significantly
different. However, of likely functional importance, the
efficacy of radial transmission in the capillaries was
significantly (P = 0.0027) greater in the capillaries than
in the arterioles.
As illustrated in Fig. 4C, our heterocellular model for
the spread of voltage from a current-injected abluminal
cell provided a reasonable prediction of the observed
Vresponder/Vstimulator ratios. Thus, even though we do
not exclude that there may be some transmission along the
abluminal cell layer, a heterocellular model in which radial
abluminal cell–endothelium transmission and endothelial
cell–endothelial cell transmission predominate appears to
account well for the observed results of the dual recording
experiments presented in Fig. 3.
Effect of branch points on electrotonic transmission
In addition to quantifying electrotonic transmission
within non-branching segments of intact microvascular
complexes, we also assessed the effect of branch points
the text and listed in Table 3, the experimentally derived transmission
efficacies used to calculate the relative voltage changes were 0.59
for radial myocyte-to-endothelium transmission, 0.52/100 μm for
axial transmission through the arteriolar endothelium and 0.59 for
endothelium-to-myocyte transmission at the site of the distantly
monitored myocyte; only axial transmission was significantly affected
by angiotensin. The Vresponder/Vstimulator ratios calculated using
this heterocellular model closely matched the observed ratios shown
in panel D.
C 2011 The Authors. Journal compilation C 2011 The Physiological Society
2390 T. Zhang and others J Physiol 589.9
Table 1. Dual recording experiments designed to determine the effect of the
capillary–tertiary arteriole branch point on the efficacy of electrotonic transmission
Tertiary Capillary-to-tertiary
Capillary arteriole Observed Predicted arteriole
distance distance Vresponder/ Vresponder/ transmission
Pair (μm) (μm) Vstimulator Vstimulator efficacy
1 128 325 0.20 0.35 0.57
2 58 122 0.22 0.38 0.58
3 155 205 0.20 0.36 0.56
4 290 90 0.21 0.36 0.58
5 205 305 0.20 0.34 0.59
6 335 33 0.14 0.37 0.39
7 220 85 0.24 0.37 0.65
8 160 170 0.23 0.36 0.64
0.20 ± 0.01 0.36 ± 0.004∗ 0.57 ± 0.03
For each of 8 dual recording experiments, one perforated-patch pipette was sealed
onto a pericyte located on a capillary while the other recording pipette was sealed
onto a myocyte located on the tertiary arteriole. The second and third columns
show the lengths of the capillary and tertiary arteriole between the two recording
sites. Also shown for each experiment is the observed Vresponder/Vstimulator ratio
and the ‘predicted’ ratio, which was calculated by using the transmission efficacies
derived from the data in Fig. 3A and B, i.e. 0.76 for radial transmission between a
pericyte and the underlying endothelium, 0.98/100 μm for axial transmission along
the capillary, 0.94/100 μm for axial transmission along the tertiary arteriole, and
0.54 for transmission from the endothelium to the myocyte of the tertiary arteriole.
For each pair of recordings, the observed Vresponder/Vstimulator ratio was smaller
than the predicted value; for this series of experiments, this was a significant
difference (∗P < 0.0001). The final column gives the calculated value that equalized
the predicted Vresponder/Vstimulator ratio with the experimentally determined
ratio; this calculated value was deemed to be the efficacy of transmission at the
capillary–tertiary arteriole branch point.
within the retinal microvascular complex. In a series of
eight experiments, dual recordings were made in which
one perforated-patch pipette was sealed onto a pericyte located on a capillary and the other pipette was
sealed onto an abluminal myocyte of the tertiary arteriole.
The Vresponder/Vstimulator ratios observed in these
experiments are shown in Table 1. Also shown in Table 1
are the ‘predicted’ ratios calculated using the efficacies
of radial and axial transmission derived as detailed
above. Consistent with a capillary/tertiary arteriole branch
point diminishing the efficacy of transmission, the
experimentally observed Vresponder/Vstimulator ratio was
significantly (P < 0.0001) less than the predicted ratio. To
adjust the predicted ratio to match the observed ratio,
the transmission efficacy at the capillary–tertiary arteriole
junction was calculated to be 0.57 ± 0.03.
We also assessed the effect of branch points between
tertiary and secondary arterioles. In series of seven dual
perforated-patch recordings in which one pipette was
sealed onto a myocyte of a tertiary arteriole and the other
onto a smooth muscle cell encircling a secondary arteriole,
the observed Vresponder/Vstimulator ratio was significantly
(P < 0.0001) less than that predicted by using the transmission efficacies determined for unbranched tertiary and
secondary arterioles (Table 2). In order to account for
the observed Vresponder/Vstimulator ratios, the efficacy
of transmission across the tertiary arteriole–secondary
arteriole junction was calculated to be 0.62 ± 0.14, which
was not significantly different from the transmission
efficacy determined for the capillary/tertiary arteriole
junction.
In other dual perforated-patch recordings, we used
analyses similar to those outlined above to assess the effects
of branch points within tertiary arterioles and capillaries.
We found that when one pipette was sealed onto a myocyte located on a branch of a tertiary arteriole and the
other pipette was sealed onto a myocyte on the proximal
stalk of this arteriole, the observed Vresponder/Vstimulator
ratio was 0.27 ± 0.03 (n = 16) at an interpipette distance
of 307 ± 42 μm. Consistent with a branch point within
a tertiary arteriole not affecting transmission, 0.27 was
also the Vresponder/Vstimulator ratio calculated by using
the efficacies determined for radial and axial transmission within tertiary arterioles. Thus, it appears that
branches within a tertiary arteriole did not cause voltage
dissipation.
C 2011 The Authors. Journal compilation C 2011 The Physiological Society
J Physiol 589.9 Electrotonic architecture of the retinal microvasculature 2391
Table 2. Dual recording experiments designed to determine the efficacy of electrotonic transmission at the tertiary
arteriole–secondary arteriole junction
Tertiary Secondary Tertiary arteriolearteriole arteriole Observed Predicted to-secondary arteriole
Cell distance (μm) distance (μm) Vresponder/Vstimulator Vresponder/Vstimulator transmission efficacy
1 22 61 0.12 0.25 0.48
2 42 58 0.14 0.25 0.56
3 33 63 0.16 0.25 0.64
4 5 55 0.17 0.25 0.68
5 50 13 0.22 0.25 0.88
6 50 270 0.10 0.22 0.45
7 60 270 0.15 0.22 0.68
0.14 ± 0.02 0.24 ± 0.004∗ 0.62 ± 0.05
For each pair of recordings, one perforated-patch pipette was sealed onto a myocyte of a tertiary arteriole and
the other onto a smooth muscle cell encircling a secondary arteriole. The second and third columns show the
axial lengths of the tertiary arteriole and the secondary arteriole that were between the two recording sites. For
each experiment, the table shows the observed Vresponder/Vstimulator ratio and the ‘predicted’ ratio, which was
calculated by using transmission efficacies derived from the data in Fig. 3B and C, i.e. 0.54 for radial transmission
between the current-injected myocyte of a tertiary arteriole and the underlying endothelium, 0.94/100 μm for
axial transmission along the endothelium of the tertiary arteriole, 0.94/100 μm for axial transmission along the
endothelium of the secondary arteriole, and 0.47 for radial transmission from the endothelium to the smooth muscle
cell monitored in the secondary arteriole. For each pair of recordings, the observed Vresponder/Vstimulator ratio was
smaller than the predicted value; for the series of experiments, this was a significant difference (∗P < 0.0001).
The final column gives the calculated value that equalized the predicted Vresponder/Vstimulator ratio with the
experimentally determined ratio; this value was deemed to be the efficacy of transmission at the site where a
tertiary arteriole branches from a secondary arteriole.
In other experiments, we recorded from pericytes at two
capillary sites between which there was a branch. For this
series of experiments, the observed Vresponder/Vstimulator
ratio at an interpipette distance of 236 ± 26 μm was
0.49 ± 0.06 (n = 6). Indicative that capillary branch points
did not cause a spreading voltage to dissipate, 0.55 was
the ratio calculated by using the efficacies of radial
and axial transmission in the capillaries. From these
data, we concluded that branches within capillaries, as
well as those within the tertiary arterioles, did not
affect electrotonic transmission. Thus, some classes of
branch points, i.e. capillary–tertiary arteriole and tertiary
arteriole–secondary arteriole, but not others affect the
spread of voltage within the retinal microvasculature.
Transmission velocities
In addition to providing data to quantify electrotonic transmission, the voltage traces recorded from a
current-injected abluminal cell and a distant responding
abluminal cell permitted the calculation of the velocity
at which a voltage is transmitted along a microvessel. We found that the conduction velocities along
capillaries, tertiary arterioles and secondary arterioles
were 50 ± 4 mm s−1 (n = 8), 53 ± 2 mm s−1 (n = 21) and
42 ± 10 mm s−1 (n = 6), respectively; these velocities are
not significantly different.
Taken together the results of our dual recording
experiments support the idea that the electrotonic architecture of the retinal microvasculature
is characterized chiefly by radial abluminal
cell–endothelium transmission and axial transmission
through the endothelial layer. Furthermore, the data
indicate that radial transmission is less efficient than axial
transmission within the capillaries, tertiary arterioles
and secondary arterioles. In addition, we found that
substantial voltage dissipation occurs at capillary–tertiary
arteriole branch points and also at junctions of tertiary
and secondary arterioles.
Effect of angiotensin on the electrotonic architecture
We considered the possibility that the electrotonic
architecture of the retinal microvasculature is not static,
but rather is dynamically modulated. Suggestive that the
vasoactive signal, angiotensin II, may affect cell coupling,
previous recordings from isolated retinal capillaries
showed that activation of AT1 receptors was associated
with a decrease in membrane capacitance (Kawamura et al.
2004). However, because membrane capacitance provides,
at best, only a qualitative suggestion of the extent of cell
coupling, we used dual recordings to quantify the effect
of angiotensin on electrotonic transmission. In addition,
since immunoreactivity for AT1 angiotensin receptors was
C 2011 The Authors. Journal compilation C 2011 The Physiological Society
2392 T. Zhang and others J Physiol 589.9
Figure 5. Immunoreactivity for the AT1 angiotensin II receptor
A, photomicrograph showing a portion of a microvascular complex
freshly isolated from the rat retina and stained with anti-AT1
antibody. Microvascular cells throughout the retinal microvasculature
were immunopositive. B, negative control in which a microvascular
complex was prepared for immunocytochemistry in the absence of
the primary antibody. C, negative control in which the primary
antibody was pre-incubated with the antigenic peptide before
exposure of a microvascular complex to the antibody/antigenic
peptide-containing solution. Scale bars: 50 μm.
found on abluminal cells and the endothelium throughout
the retinal microvasculature (Fig. 5), this study assessed
the effect of angiotensin on electrotonic transmission in
secondary and tertiary arterioles, as well as in the capillary
network.
As illustrated in Fig. 6, dual perforated-patch recordings
demonstrated that the Vresponder/Vstimulator ratio transiently decreased during exposure to angiotensin. Using
a similar protocol, Vresponder/Vstimulator ratios at
various interpipette distances were obtained in recordings
from pairs of capillary pericytes (Fig. 7A), of tertiary
arteriolar myocytes (Fig. 7B) and of secondary arteriolar smooth muscle cells (Fig. 7C). Analysis of the
data in Fig. 7 showed that angiotensin caused the
efficacy of axial transmission (Fig. 8A) to decrease
significantly (P < 0.0001) from 0.98 ± 0.03/100 μm to
0.50 ± 0.05/100 μm (n = 6) in the capillaries, from
0.94 ± 0.08/100 μm to 0.52 ± 0.07/100 μm (n = 10) in
the tertiary arterioles, and from 0.94 ± 0.08/100 μm to
0.55 ± 0.11/100 μm (n = 8) in the secondary arterioles. In
contrast, because the extrapolated Vresponder/Vstimulator
ratios at 0 μm were not altered significantly by
angiotensin (Fig. 7), it appears that radial transmission
in capillaries, tertiary arterioles and secondary arterioles was unaffected by this vasoactive molecule (Fig. 8B).
In addition, we did not detect a significant effect of
angiotensin on transmission at the various branch points
within the microvasculature. Thus, these experiments
indicated that angiotensin selectively inhibited axial
transmission.
As shown in Fig. 4D and E, the observed
Vresponder/Vstimulator ratios obtained in the presence
of angiotensin were accurately predicted by our
heterocellular model when the efficacy of axial transmission was selectively decreased. Furthermore, as
illustrated in Fig. 9, calculations that were based
on our heterocellular model (Fig. 4C and E) and
that used the efficacies of transmission derived from
experiments performed under control conditions and
during angiotensin exposure (Table 3) predicted that
angiotensin would profoundly diminish the proximal
spread of a voltage generated within the capillary tree.
Figure 6. Example of an experiment assessing the effect of angiotensin on electrotonic transmission
A, photomicrograph showing the sites at which perforated-patch pipettes were sealed onto a capillary pericyte and
the myocyte of tertiary arteriole. Scale bar: 50 μm. B, plot of the Vresponder/Vstimulator ratio versus time. Each
point is the mean of 3 successive sweeps. A depolarizing current was injected via the recording pipette that was
sealed onto a capillary pericyte. Bar shows when 500 nM angiotensin was added to the perfusate. C, voltage traces
from a current-injected capillary pericyte and from a myocyte on the tertiary arteriole when the bathing solution
lacked angiotensin. D, voltage traces from the capillary pericyte and the myocyte on the secondary arteriole during
exposure of the microvascular complex to angiotensin.
C 2011 The Authors. Journal compilation C 2011 The Physiological Society
J Physiol 589.9 Electrotonic architecture of the retinal microvasculature 2393
Figure 7. Vresponder/Vstimulator ratios versus the distance between a pair of recording sites on microvessels during exposure to 500 nM angiotensin
A, ratios for recordings from pairs of pericytes located on capillaries. B, ratios for dual recordings from pairs of
myocytes located on tertiary arterioles. C, ratios for dual recordings from pairs of smooth muscle cells located
on secondary arterioles. For each panel, the first-order exponential fit is shown. Also shown in each panel is the
first-order exponential fit for the Vresponder/Vstimulator ratios obtained under control conditions and plotted in
Fig. 3.
Effect of angiotensin on the I–V relations of isolated
capillaries and arterioles
In addition to quantifying the effect of angiotensin on
the transmission of voltages generated by the injection
of current, we wished to assess how angiotensin affected
the spread of a physiological input. To do this, we used
single perforated-patch recordings to measure the change
in current–voltage relationsinduced by angiotensin,which
is known to activate a non-specific cation conductance
in the retinal microvasculature (Kawamura et al. 2004).
For an initial series of experiments, microvascular
complexes were transected at the capillary–tertiary
arteriole junction and/or at the junction of the tertiary and
secondary arterioles. In this way, we could obtain single
perforated-patch recordings from abluminal cells located
on isolated segments of capillaries, tertiary arterioles and
secondary arterioles.
Figure 8. Effect of angiotensin on electrotonic transmission in the retinal microvasculature
A, efficacies of axial transmission under control conditions and in the presence of 500 nM angiotensin. For each
microvascular region, dual perforated-patch recordings were made from abluminal cells, i.e. pericytes of the
capillaries, myocytes of the tertiary arterioles and encircling smooth muscle cells of the secondary arterioles.
The number of dual perforated-patch experiments for each group is shown in Table 3. For each microvascular
region, angiotensin significantly (∗P < 0.0001) decreased the efficacy of axial transmission. B, efficacies of radial
transmission under control conditions and in the presence of 500 nM angiotensin. Perforated-patch recordings
were as described in panel A, and the number of dual perforated-patch experiments for each group is shown in
Table 3. For each microvascular region, angiotensin did not significantly change the efficacy of radial transmission.
C 2011 The Authors. Journal compilation C 2011 The Physiological Society
2394 T. Zhang and others J Physiol 589.9
Table 3. Efficacies of electrotonic transmission at various sites within the retinal microvasculature
Efficacy of transmission Efficacy of transmission
Site within the retinal microvasculature under control conditions in angiotensin
Capillary
Axial transmission
Non-branching regions 0.98 ± 0.03/100 μm (n = 27) 0.50 ± 0.07/100 μm (n = 6)∗
Branch points 1.12 ± 0.16 (n = 6) 1.11 ± 0.08 (n = 3)
Radial transmission 0.76 ± 0.05 (n = 27) 0.76 ± 0.05 (n = 6)
Capillary/tertiary arteriole branch point 0.57 ± 0.08 (n = 8) 0.62 ± 0.19 (n = 4)
Secondary arteriole
Axial transmission
Non-branching regions 0.94 ± 0.08/100 μm (n = 29) 0.52 ± 0.07/100 μm (n = 10)∗
Branch points 1.00 ± 0.10 (n = 16) 1.14 ± 0.07(n = 3)
Radial transmission 0.54 ± 0.04 (n = 29) 0.59 ± 0.08 (n = 10)
Tertiary arteriole/secondary arteriole branch point 0.62 ± 0.05 (n = 7) 0.54 ± 0.12 (n = 4)
Secondary arteriole
Axial transmission
Non-branching regions 0.94 ± 0.08/100 μm (n = 10) 0.55 ± 0.11 (n = 8)∗
Radial transmission 0.47 ± 0.06 (n = 10) 0.45 ± 0.13 (n = 8)
Values are derived from the data shown in Figs. 3 and 7 and in Tables 1 and 2. The n values are the number of pairs of perforated-patch
recordings. Asterisks indicate that angiotensin significantly decreased the efficacy of axial transmission in the capillaries (P < 0.0001),
the tertiary arterioles (P = 0.0057) and the secondary arterioles (P = 0.0097); at other microvascular sites, the transmission efficacy was
not significantly affected by angiotensin.
Figure 9. Predicted voltage decay within the retinal
microvasculature under control conditions and in the presence
of angiotensin
The vertical axis shows the relative voltage changes predicted to
occur in abluminal cells during the spread of a relative voltage of
1.45 that was generated in the endothelium of a capillary at a site
400 μm distal to the capillary–tertiary arteriole junction. Relative
voltages in abluminal cells were calculated at 100 μm intervals based
on the heterocellular models illustrated in Fig. 4C and E and with the
use of the efficacies of radial transmission, of axial transmission and
of transmission at branch points listed in Table 3. Our heterocellular
model of the electrotonic architecture of the retinal microvasculature
predicts that the amount of a capillary-generated voltage spreading
into and through the proximal arterioles is markedly decreased
during exposure to angiotensin.
We found that during exposure to angiotensin, the
transected capillaries generated a current that was
inward at physiological membrane potentials and caused
depolarization (Fig. 10A). In contrast, the current–voltage
relations of transected tertiary arterioles and transected secondary arterioles were minimally affected by
angiotensin (Fig. 10B and C). From these experiments,
we concluded that the angiotensin-induced conductance
is generated predominantly by the capillaries; little
is generated by the arterioles. We also concluded
from these observations that the lack a significant
angiotensin-induced current in the arterioles indicates
that a decrease in membrane resistance is not required
in order for angiotensin to decrease the efficacy of axial
transmission.
Effect of angiotensin on intact microvascular
complexes
The finding that the angiotensin-induced current is
generated predominately in the capillaries led to additional
experiments designed to test the prediction of our
heterocellular model (Fig. 9) that angiotensin’s inhibition
of axial transmission would minimize the spread of a
capillary-generated current. In these experiments, single
perforated-patch pipettes were sealed onto the capillaries,
tertiary arterioles and secondary arterioles of intact microvascular complexes, and I–V relations were determined
before and during exposure to angiotensin. As detailed
in Methods, the angiotensin-induced NSC conductance
C 2011 The Authors. Journal compilation C 2011 The Physiological Society
J Physiol 589.9 Electrotonic architecture of the retinal microvasculature 2395
was quantified at –103 mV. As summarized in Fig. 11,
the angiotensin-induced conductances detected in the
tertiary and secondary arterioles were not significantly
different in recordingsmadefrom intact, as compared with
transected, microvascular complexes. Thus, consistent
with angiotensin potently attenuating axial transmission,
essentially none of the angiotensin-induced current
generated in the capillaries spread to the proximal microvasculature.
Discussion
To better understand the functional organization of the
retinal microvasculature, we used dual perforated-patch
recordings to characterize the electrotonic architecture of
microvascular complexes freshly isolated from the adult
rat retina. These experiments revealed that a voltage
spreading axially along a capillary, a tertiary arteriole or a
secondary arteriole is transmitted efficiently with a rate of
decay of only ∼5% per 100 μm. However, our analysis
also demonstrated that the retinal microvasculature is
not simply a well-coupled syncytium. Rather, voltage is
attenuated by ∼45% as it spreads from a branch of the
capillary network to a tertiary arteriole and also as it
passes from a tertiary arteriole to the proximal secondary
arteriole. Our dual recording data also led us to infer that
radial transmission between an abluminal cell and the
underlying endothelium is not as efficient as axial transmission through the endothelium.
In this study, we also used dual recordings to assess
the effect of angiotensin II on electrotonic transmission.
These experiments indicated that this vasoactive molecule
selectively inhibits axial transmission. Thus, the electrotonic architecture of the retinal microvasculature is not
static, but rather can be dynamically modulated by vasoactive signals.
Comparison of retinal and non-retinal vasculatures
How does the electrotonic architecture of retinal microvasculature compare with the functional organization
of other vascular systems? A key finding of our
dual recording experiments is that the axial spread
of voltage within retinal capillaries, tertiary arterioles
and secondary arterioles is highly efficient. Although
there appear to be no previous dual recording studies
directly assessing electrotonic transmission within a
capillary–arteriole complex, our finding of efficient axial
transmission in retinal microvessels is consistent with
studies demonstrating in non-retinal tissues that the
Figure 10. Effect of angiotensin on current–voltage relations recorded from capillaries, tertiary arterioles and secondary arterioles
A, averaged I–V plots generated from single perforated-patch recordings made from 8 pericyte located on
capillaries whose connections with tertiary arterioles had been transected. ◦, before angiotensin; , during
exposure to 500 nM angiotensin. At each tested voltage from –38 mV to –108 mV, the inward current was
significantly (P < 0.0001) larger during exposure to angiotensin; at 12 mV and 22 mV, the outward current during
angiotensin exposure was significantly (P < 0.05) larger. B, averaged I–V plots generated from perforated-patch
recordings made from 6 myocytes located on tertiary arterioles whose connections with capillaries and secondary
arterioles had been transected. ◦, before angiotensin; , during exposure to 500 nM angiotensin. Angiotensin did
not significantly affect the current amplitude. C, averaged I–V plots generated from perforated-patch recordings
made from 3 smooth muscle cells located on secondary arterioles whose connections with tertiary arterioles
had been transected. ◦, before angiotensin; , during exposure to 500 nM angiotensin. Angiotensin did not
significantly affect the current amplitude.
C 2011 The Authors. Journal compilation C 2011 The Physiological Society
2396 T. Zhang and others J Physiol 589.9
application of voltage-changing chemicals onto a capillary
can elicit vasomotor responses in proximal arterioles
(Dietrich, 1989; Song & Tyml, 1993; Berg et al. 1997;
Beach et al. 1998; McGahren et al. 1998). Furthermore,
the voltage decay rate of ∼5%/100 μm within the
retinal microvasculature is similar to the rate of decay
for axial transmission through larger vessels in the
circulatory system (Hirst & Neild, 1978; Emerson et al.
2002). In addition, our finding that a voltage spreads
with a conduction velocity of ∼50 mm s−1 along retinal
capillaries, tertiary arterioles and secondary arterioles is
similar to the velocities reported for larger vessels, such
as those located in the ureter (23 mm s−1) (Tsuchiya &
Takein, 1990), retractor muscle (∼45 mm s−1) (Emerson
et al. 2002) and small intestine (∼85 mm s−1) (Stevens
et al. 2000). Thus, rapid and efficient axial transmission
may be a feature, not only of the retinal microvasculature,
but of the circulatory system in general.
In contrast to the apparent universality of highly
efficient axial transmission, the efficacy of radial transmission varies widely. For example, in guinea-pig
mesenteric secondary arterioles, the efficacy of transmission between an abluminal smooth muscle and the
Figure 11. Angiotensin-induced non-specific cation (NSC)
conductance density in capillaries, tertiary arterioles and
secondary arterioles, which were part of an intact
microvascular complex or that had been transected from the
rest of the microvascular plexus
For the capillary groups, 8 recordings were from pericytes located on
transected capillaries, and 6 were from pericytes on capillaries of
intact microvascular complexes. For the tertiary arteriole groups, 6
recordings were from myocytes located on transected tertiary
arterioles, and 5 were from myocytes on tertiary arterioles of intact
microvascular complexes. For the secondary arteriole groups, 3
recordings were from smooth muscle cells encircling transected
secondary arterioles, and 4 were from smooth muscle cells on
secondary arterioles of intact microvascular complexes. For each
portion of the microvasculature, the angiotensin-induced
non-specific cation conductance density was not significantly
different in intact and transected microvessels.
endothelium is only ∼6% (Yamamoto et al. 2001), while
radial myoendothelial coupling is reported to be robust in
arteries of the hamster retractor muscle (Emerson et al.
2002). Between these extremes, our study indicated the
efficacy of radial transmission is 76% in the capillaries,
54% in the tertiary arterioles and 47% in the secondary
arterioles (Table 3).
Another aspect of the electrotonic architecture that
appears to vary within the circulatory system is the efficacy
of transmission between abluminal cells. While transmission along the smooth muscle layer of hamster cheek
pouch arteries is reported to be quite efficient (Bartlett &
Segal, 2000; Budel et al. 2003), a current injected into a
smooth muscle cell of a mesenteric secondary arteriole
was found to dissipate by ∼90% after spreading just
25 μm along the abluminal layer (Yamamoto et al. 2001).
Similarly, our model-based analysis of dual recording
experiments indicates that abluminal cell–abluminal cell
is, at most, only a minor pathway for the spread of voltage
within the retinal microvasculature.
At present, it is uncertain whether the electrotonic
architecture at non-retinal locations in the circulatory
system is static or is dynamic. Since angiotensin’s
inhibition of axial transmission is a newly recognized
action of this vasoactive molecule, it is not known whether
this vasoactive signal modulates electrotonic transmission
elsewhere. With extensive documentation that the efficacy
of voltage spread is not uniform within the system, it
is clearly risky to extrapolate the findings of our study to
non-retinal tissues. In fact, it is imperative that the electrotonic architecture be characterized for each vascular bed.
Functional specialization within the retinal
microvasculature
Characterization of the electrotonic architecture of the
retinal microvasculature provided further support for the
emerging concept that there is functional specialization
within this operational unit. Specifically, our finding that
radial transmission between an abluminal cell and the endothelium is significantly more efficient in the capillaries
than in the arterioles supports our proposal (Matsushita
et al. 2010) that the capillary network is particularly
well adapted for generating and transmitting an electrophysiological response to a vasoactive signal. Consistent
with this functional concept, the relative efficacy of radial
transmission in the capillaries results in a substantial
majority of the voltage generated in a pericyte being
transmitted to the underlying endothelium, which then
provides a highly effective pathway for proximal transmission. In addition to having the highest efficacy of radial
transmission, capillaries are known to have physiological
attributes that enhance their ability to generate a voltage
change in response to vasoactive signals. For example,
C 2011 The Authors. Journal compilation C 2011 The Physiological Society
J Physiol 589.9 Electrotonic architecture of the retinal microvasculature 2397
because functional KATP channels are chiefly located in the
capillaries, this portion of the microvasculature generates
almost all of the hyperpolarizing KATP current induced
by adenosine (Ishizaki et al. 2009). In addition, because
capillaries have a relatively small outward KIR conductance
(Matsushita & Puro, 2006) and thereby a highermembrane
resistance, a change in ion channel activity induced
by a vasoactive signal evokes a relatively large voltage
change. On the other hand, although capillaries effectively
generate and transmit voltages, their dearth of functional
voltage-dependent calcium channels (VDCCs) prevents
VDCC-dependent vasomotor responses from occurring
in the capillary network (Ishizaki et al. 2009). Rather,
the capillary’s specialization for generating and transmitting voltages is complemented by the proximal microvasculature’s abundance of VDCCs (Matsushita et al.
2010),which can convert a capillary-generated voltageinto
a change in abluminal cell calcium and, thereby, changes
in abluminal cell contractility, lumen diameter and blood
flow.
Effect of branch points on electrotonic transmission
This study also established that at some, but not all,
branch points in the retinal microvasculature, there is
significant voltage dissipation. We found that a spreading
voltage dissipates by ∼45% as it passes proximally from
a branch of the capillary network to a tertiary arteriole.
Transmission through the branch point of tertiary and
secondary arterioles also causes a similar attenuation of
voltage. Thus, as deduced previously from the study of
larger, i.e. 50–75 μm diameter, arterioles of the ileal submucosa (Segal & Neild, 1996), the effect of branch points
must be considered in an analysis of how voltage flows
through a microvascular network. On the other hand, our
study indicated that not all classes of branch points within
the retinal microvasculature had a detectable impact on
the spread of voltage. Specifically, in our dual recording
experiments, the efficacy of distal-to-proximal transmission was not significantly affected by intra-capillary
or intra-arteriole branches. At present, an explanation for
the differing effects of branch points within the retinal
microvasculature awaits further study, although it appears
likely that the relative diameters (Segal & Neild, 1996)
and capacitative loads of the parent and daughter vessels
may determine how much, if any, voltage dissipation
occurs. Also awaiting determination is the functional
consequence of the voltage dissipation that occurs at
the capillary–tertiary arteriole junction and also at the
junction of tertiary and secondary arterioles. Our working
hypothesis is that a transmission efficacy of <1.0 at the site
where sister branches converge enhances the ability of the
proximal vessel to integrate inputs from these distal sites.
Angiotensin-induced inhibition of electrotonic
transmission
An important operational concept established by this
study is that angiotensin modulates the electrotonic
architecture of the retinal microvasculature. Previously, we
raised this possibility based on voltage-clamp recordings
showing that a decrease in the membrane capacitance
(Cm) is associated with exposure of retinal capillaries to
angiotensin. However, because a change in Cm provides,
at best, only a grossly qualitative indication of the
extent of coupling within a population of cells (Zhao
& Santos-Sacchi, 1998), does not allow determination of
transmission efficacies, cannot distinguish effects on radial
and/or axial transmission and is affected by membrane
events unrelated to intercellular communication (Gillis,
1995), it was necessary to use a more specific and sensitive
assay. To eliminate the ambiguity of a Cm assay, the
present study quantified electrotonic transmission
between a pair of current-clamped recording pipettes. We
found that during exposure to angiotensin, the rate at
which a voltage decays as it spreads along a capillary,
tertiary arteriole or secondary arteriole is increased
from ∼5%/100 μm to ∼50%/100 μm. Indicative that
angiotensin selectively inhibits axial transmission, neither
the efficacy of radial transmission between abluminal cells
and the endothelium nor transmission at branch points
between a capillary and a tertiary arteriole or between a
tertiary and secondary arteriole was significantly affected
by this vasoactive molecule.
Although the widespread effect of angiotensin on axial
transmission in the retinal microvasculature is consistent
with our finding that AT1 angiotensin receptors are
expressed throughout this microvascular complex, the
mechanism by which angiotensin inhibits axial transmission is uncertain. However, our experiments indicate
that this effect does not require a change in the membrane
resistance since exposure to angiotensin caused a 10-fold
decrease in the efficacy of axial transmission not only in
the capillaries where angiotensin induces a non-specific
cation conductance, but also in the arterioles where only
small currents are activated by this vasoactive molecule.
What are the functional consequences of angiotensin’s
inhibition of axial transmission? An operational result is
that the electrophysiological response of the capillaries
to angiotensin remains highly localized. Specifically, our
recordings from intact and transected microvascular
complexes demonstrated that the depolarization caused by
angiotensin’s activation of non-specific cation channels in
the capillary network remains confined to the capillaries. It
seems probable that in the presence of angiotensin, voltage
changes generated in the capillaries by other vasoactive
molecules (Puro, 2007) would also be prevented from
spreading proximally. In this way, input to a capillary may
evoke a local, rather than a global, change in blood flow.
C 2011 The Authors. Journal compilation C 2011 The Physiological Society
2398 T. Zhang and others J Physiol 589.9
Based on these experimentally derived considerations, we
propose that the action of angiotensin to inhibit axial
transmission allows this vasoactive signal to regulate the
geographical extent of the microvasculature’s response to
voltage-changing inputs.
Isolated retinal microvascular complexes: advantages
and caveats
This analysis of the electrotonic architecture of the retinal
microvasculature was based on the study of freshly isolated microvascular complexes. With this experimental
preparation, it was relatively straightforward to obtain
dual perforated-patch recordings from abluminal cells
located at well defined locations in a retinal microvascular complex. Also, the ability to transect an isolated
microvascular complex at the capillary–tertiary arteriole
junction and also at the tertiary arteriole–secondary
arteriole junction permitted detection of currents
generated within the capillaries, tertiary arterioles or
secondary arterioles. Furthermore, use of isolated microvessels allowed us to assess the effect of angiotensin in the
absence of confounding effects mediated via non-vascular
cells. However, although recordings from endothelial cells
would have helped in our assessment of electrotonic transmission, this proved impractical since the vascular endothelium is extensively covered by abluminal cells whose
anatomy and function were disrupted during the process
of sealing a pipette onto an endothelial cell. Also, the
technique of internal perfusion of retinal microvessels
with toxic chemicals to selectively kill the endothelial cells
has yet to be perfected. In addition, since the isolated
microvessels were not internally perfused, the effects of
intralumnial pressure on electrotonic transmission were
not evaluated in this study. In the future, as additional
quantitative data concerning the retinal microvascular
become available, a better understanding of the physiology
of this operational unit can be gained by the formulation
of a detailed computational model, as has been done
for skeletal muscle resistance arteries (Diep et al. 2005).
Also awaiting future study is the characterization of the
specific connexins that constitute the homocellular and
heterocellular gap junction pathways within the retinal
microvasculature. Future studies should also assess how
the electrotonic architecture of the microvasculature of
the retina is affected by diabetes, which disrupts gap
junction function in the retinal microvessels (Oku et al.
2001) and causes sight-threatening complications that
involve, at least in part, the retina’s renin–angiotensin
system (Fletcher et al. 2010). Finally, it must be noted
that the conclusions based on this study of isolated vessels
require in vivo verification, although technical advances
will be required in order to assess electrotonic transmission
within the retinal microvasculature in vivo.
Conclusions
In summary, this study has shown that the electrotonic architecture of the retinal microvasculature is
characterized by highly efficient axial transmission within
the capillaries, tertiary arterioles and secondary arterioles. On other hand, radial abluminal cell-to-endothelium
transmission, as well as transmission at branch points
between a capillary and its tertiary arteriole and between
a tertiary arteriole and its secondary arteriole, is
significantly less efficient. This study has also established
that angiotensin selectively and profoundly inhibits
axial transmission within capillaries, tertiary arterioles and secondary arterioles. As a consequence, the
angiotensin-induced depolarization generated in the
capillaries remains localized to the capillary network
and fails to spread to the calcium channel-rich proximal
portions of the microvasculature. Of general physiological
importance, angiotensin’s inhibition of axial transmission
establishes the operational concept that the electrotonic architecture of the retinal microvasculature is not
static, but rather is dynamically modulated by vasoactive
signals.
References
Bartlett I & Segal SS (2000). Resolution of smooth muscle and
endothelial pathways for conduction along hamster cheek
pouch arterioles. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 278,
H604–H612.
Beach JM, McGahren ED & Duling BR (1998). Capillaries and
arterioles are electrically coupled in hamster cheek pouch.
Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 275, H1489–1496.
Berg BR, Cohen KD & Sarelius IH (1997). Direct coupling
between blood flow and metabolism at the capillary level in
striated muscle. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 272,
H2693–2700.
Budel S, Bartlett I & Segal SS (2003). Homocellular conduction
along endothelium and smooth muscle of arterioles in
hamster cheek pouch: unmasking an NO wave. Circ Res 93,
61–68.
Cohen KD, Berg BR & Sarelius IH (2000). Remote arteriolar
dilations in response to muscle contraction under capillaries.
Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 278, H1916–1923.
Diep H, Vigmond E, Segal SS & Welsh D (2005). Defining
electrical communication in skeletal muscle resistance
arteries: a computational approach. J Physiol 568, 267–281.
Dietrich HH (1989). Effect of locally applied epinephrine and
norepinephrine on blood flow and diameter in capillaries of
rat mesentery. Microvasc Res 38, 125–135.
Drummond GB (2009). Reporting ethical matters in The
Journal of Physiology: standards and advice. J Physiol 587,
713–719.
Emerson G, Neild TO & Segal SS (2002). Conduction of
hyperpolarization along hamster feed arteries: augmentation
by acetylcholine. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 282,
H102–H109.
C 2011 The Authors. Journal compilation C 2011 The Physiological Society
J Physiol 589.9 Electrotonic architecture of the retinal microvasculature 2399
Fletcher EL, Phipps JA, Ward MM, Vessey KA &
Wilkerson-Berka JL (2010). The renin-angiotensin system in
retinal health and disease: Its influence on neurons, glia and
the vasculature. Prog Retin Eye Res 29, 284–311.
Gillis KD (1995). Techniques for membrane capacitance
measurements. In Single-Channel Recording. ed. Sakmann B
& Neher E, pp. 155–198. Plenum, New York.
Hirschi KK & D’Amore PA (1996). Pericytes in the
microvasculature. Cardiovasc Res 32, 687–698.
Hirst GD & Neild TO (1978). An analysis of excitatory
junctional potentials recorded from arterioles. J Physiol 80,
87–104.
Ishizaki E, Fukumoto M & Puro DG (2009). Functional KATP
channels in the rat retinal microvasculature: topographical
distribution, redox regulation, spermine modulation and
diabetic alteration. J Physiol 587, 2233–2253.
Joyce NC, Haire MF & Palade GE (1985). Contractile proteins
in pericytes. I. Immunoperoxidase localization of
tropomyosin. J Cell Biol 100, 1379–1386.
Kawamura H, Kobayashi M, Li Q, Yamanishi S, Katsumura K,
Minami M, Wu DM & Puro DG (2004). Effects of
angiotensin II on the pericyte-containing microvasculature
of the rat retina. J Physiol 561, 671–683.
Kawamura H, Oku H, Li Q, Sakagami K & Puro DG (2002).
Endothelin-induced changes in the physiology of retinal
pericytes. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 43, 882–888.
Kawamura H, Sugiyama T, Wu DM, Kobayashi M, Yamanishi
S, Katsumura K & Puro DG (2003). ATP: a vasoactive signal
in the pericyte-containing microvasculature of the rat retina.
J Physiol 551, 787–799.
Kuwabara T & Cogan D (1960). Studies of retinal vascular
patterns. Part I. Normal architecture. Arch Ophthalmol 64,
904–911.
Matsushita K, Fukumoto, M, Kobayashi T, Kobayashi M,
Ishizaki E, Minami M, Katsumura K, Liao SD, Wu DM,
Zhang T & Puro DG (2010). Diabetes-induced inhibition of
voltage-dependent calcium channels in the retinal
microvasculature: role of spermine. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci
51, 5979–5990.
Matsushita K & Puro DG (2006). Topographical heterogeneity
of KIR currents in pericyte-containing microvessels of the rat
retina: effect of diabetes. J Physiol 573, 483–495.
McGahren ED, Beach JM & Duling BR (1998). Capillaries
demonstrate changes in membrane potential in response to
pharmacological stimuli. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 274,
H60–65.
Oku H, Kodama T, Sakagami K & Puro DG (2001).
Diabetes-induced disruption of gap junction pathways
within the retinal microvasculature. Invest Ophthalmol Vis
Sci 42, 1915–1920.
Peppiatt CM, Howarth C, Mobbs P & Attwell D (2006).
Bidirectional control of CNS capillary diameter by pericytes.
Nature 443, 700–704.
Puro DG (2007). Physiology and pathobiology of the
pericyte-containing retinal microvasculature: new
developments. Microcirculation 14, 1–10.
Sakagami K, Wu DM & Puro DG (1999). Physiology of rat
retinal pericytes: modulation of ion channel activity by
serum-derived molecules. J Physiol 521, 637–650.
Schonfelder U, Hofer A, Paul M & Funk RH (1998). In situ
observation of living pericytes in rat retinal capillaries.
Microvasc Res 56, 22–29.
Segal SS & Neild TO (1996). Conducted depolarization in
arteriole networks of the guinea-pig small intestine: effect of
branching of signal dissipation. J Physiol 496, 229–244.
Shepro D & Morel NM (1993). Pericyte physiology. FASEB J 7,
1031–1038.
Song H & Tyml K (1993). Evidence for sensing and integration
of biological signals by the capillary network. Am J Physiol
Heart Circ Physiol 265, H1235–1242.
Stevens RJ, Publicover NG & Smith TK (2000). Propagation
and neural regulation of calcium waves in longitundinal and
circular muscle layers of guinea pig small intestine.
Gastroenterology 118, 892–904.
Tilton RG (1991). Capillary pericytes: perspectives and future
trends. J Electron Microsc Tech 19, 327–344.
Tsuchiya T & Takei N (1990). Pressure responses and
conduction of peristaltic wave in guinea-pig ureter. Jpn J
Physiol 40, 139–149.
Wu DM, Miniami M, Kawamura H & Puro DG (2006).
Electrotonic transmission within pericyte-containing retinal
microvessels. Microcirculation 13, 353–363.
Yamamoto Y, Klemm M, Edwards FR & Suzuki H (2001).
Intercellular electrical communication among smooth
muscle and endothelial cells in guinea-pig mesenteric
arterioles. J Physiol 535, 181–195.
Zhao HB & Santos-Sacchi J (1998). Effect of membrane tension
on gap junctional conductance of supporting cells in Corti’s
organ. J Gen Physiol 112, 447–455.
Author contributions
All experiments were performed at the University of Michigan
by T.Z. and D.W.; they also contributed to the design of
experiments, the analysis of data and the critical review of drafts
of the manuscript. G.X. contributed to project planning and
manuscript review. D.G.P. led in the conception and design of
the project, in the analysis of the data, and in the writing of the
manuscript. All authors gave final approval of the version to be
published.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank Bret Hughes for helpful discussions. David
Reed provided aid with statistical analysis. This project was
supported by Grants EY12505 and EY07003 from the National
Institutes of Health.
C 2011 The Authors. Journal compilation C 2011 The Physiological Society


Introduction
This is a description of the simulation that were conducted using MATLAB code to attempt to replicate the results from Moshkforoush et al., 2020 (1) and better understand the dynamic of capillary kir channel behavior using mathematical simulations.
Methods
We extracted the mathematical equations used in the Moshkoforoush et al, 2020 (1) paper:
 










The MATLAB code defined in HK_fast_images.m consists of two functions: 
A main function HK_fast_images with a min and max arguments that are passed from command line. It loops in increments of 0.01 from the min to the max and calls the second defined function this incremental value is used to test different G_gap values, we pass the later to the second defined function simulate_process

 

The second function simulate_process consists of two loops an outer loop defined by the variable loop=600000,  representing the time in ms and the inner loop loops through the number of cells, NG, in this particular simulation we are using NG=200. We inject a current I_app = 50uA when time t is between 100 and 400. This function code is too long to include in this write up but is included as an attachment. 












These snippets include the relevant two nested loops
 

It returns an array with the simulation data points. Which the first function eventually plots. The simulation is called from an external batch file using the following commands, we limit each simulation to 50 to avoid MATLAB out of memory. We use MATLAB in the command line mode instead of graphical mode to minimize the memory and CPU usage footprint.
Batch commands:
matlab -nodisplay -nosplash -nodesktop -wait -r  "cd 'C:\Users\iqbal\Downloads\Capillary-Kir-Model-master\Capillary-Kir-Model-master\scripts\Ours2\'; HK_fast_images(601,650); exit;"
matlab -nodisplay -nosplash -nodesktop -wait -r  "cd 'C:\Users\iqbal\Downloads\Capillary-Kir-Model-master\Capillary-Kir-Model-master\scripts\Ours2\'; HK_fast_images(651,700); exit;"
matlab -nodisplay -nosplash -nodesktop -wait -r  "cd 'C:\Users\iqbal\Downloads\Capillary-Kir-Model-master\Capillary-Kir-Model-master\scripts\Ours2\'; HK_fast_images(701,750); exit;"
matlab -nodisplay -nosplash -nodesktop -wait -r  "cd 'C:\Users\iqbal\Downloads\Capillary-Kir-Model-master\Capillary-Kir-Model-master\scripts\Ours2\'; HK_fast_images(751,800); exit;"
matlab -nodisplay -nosplash -nodesktop -wait -r  "cd 'C:\Users\iqbal\Downloads\Capillary-Kir-Model-master\Capillary-Kir-Model-master\scripts\Ours2\'; HK_fast_images(801,850); exit;"

The initial equation code was extracted from the file F2A.m included as a supplementary material but the equations were modified to be used with multiple cells and using different initialization values that we obtained from the following papers Uhlirova et al,. (2), and Rallany et all., (3) and some guess work based on assumptions.
These are the values we used in the simulation:
Variable Name/Value	Variable explanation
dt = 0.001	Time step in ms
loop = 600000	Number of steps in ms
Ng= 200;	Number of simulated cells
Vm = -33*ones(1,Ng);	Vm array of membrane potential for each of the 200 cells , all =-33
cm = 9.4;	%micro farad / cm^2 %specific capacitane
a = 0.01;	%axon radius unit is milimiter = 10 micrometers [NOT USED]
rho = 0.0354/(0.36^2);	NOT USED
dx = 0.06;	%cm cell size 60 micrometer
g_gap = g_gap_value;	G_gap value passed as a command line argument to the script the simulation increases it gradually by 0.01 increments, the goal is to run simulations from G_gap value ranging from 0.01 to 100 using brute force
eki1 = (g_gap*dt)/(dx^(2)*cm);	Eki1 from HH equations (from the Kir paper)
eki2 = dt/cm;	Eki2 from HH equations (from the Kir paper)
t=0;	%initial time step value
K_i = 150;	% [mM] intracellular potassium concentration
K_out=5*ones(1,loop);	Potassium stimulation for the number of timesteps
current = -1;	% [pA]   Injected current [NOT USED]
R  = 8314.0;	% [mJmol-1K-1]	gas constant
T = 293;	% [K] absolute temperature
F  = 96485.0;	% [Cmol-1] Faraday's constant
RT_F = R*T/F;	% RT/F
z_K  = 1;	% K ion valence
delta_V_kir  = 25;	% [mV]	voltage diff at half-max.
G_kirbar = 0.94;	% [nS/mM^0.5] inward rectifier constant
n_kir = 0.5;	% inward rectifier constant
E_bg = -30;	% [mV] resting membrane potential
ratio=0.7;	% [mM0.5] Gbg to Gkirbar ratio
G_bg = ratio*G_kirbar;	[nS] background conductance
I_app = zeros(1,Ng);	Applied current per cell, for cell 100 in time between 100 to 400 we apply 50 instead
I_bg	Array containing the I_bg current for each of the 200 cell calculated from the first paper (1) equations
I_kir	Array containing the kir current for each of the 200 cell calculated from the first paper (1) equations
	
	
	

Results
Simulation is still running it takes several hours. We obtained the following plots for G_gap_values from 0.01 to 33. The rest will be included in a zip file after the simulations are over.
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
References:
1)	Moshkforoush, A., Ashenagar, B., Harraz, O. F., Dabertrand, F., Longden, T. A., Nelson, M. T., & Tsoukias, N. M. (2020). The capillary Kir channel as sensor and amplifier of neuronal signals: Modeling insights on K+-mediated neurovascular communication. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 117(28), 16626-16637.
2)	Uhlirova, H., Kılıç, K., Tian, P., Thunemann, M., Desjardins, M., Saisan, P. A., ... & Devor, A. (2016). Cell type specificity of neurovascular coupling in cerebral cortex. elife, 5, e14315.
3)	Ballanyi, K., Doutheil, J., & Brockhaus, J. (1996). Membrane potentials and microenvironment of rat dorsal vagal cells in vitro during energy depletion. The Journal of Physiology, 495(3), 769-784.


Introduction
This is a continuation of using computational methods to reproduce the results from Moshkforoush et al., 2020 (1) the extracted mathematical model we extracted during the previous semester from that paper was used to try to match some experimental results Zhang et a (2) paper. This paper discusses how the circulatory system controls microvascular function based on metabolic demand, with a focus on the retinal circulatory system. Which consists of micro vessels. The measurements were taken using recording pipettes located at capillary/arterioles where a voltage is induced. And how this mechanism allows the control of the blood flow in these capillaries/arterioles. The paper also discusses that capillaries network is controlled by angiotensin. The study used rats to isolate the microvascular complexes from retinas. And a tissue print technique was used to take measurements using dual recording tools. The results in the paper discuss that retinal microvasculature offers highly efficient transmission. And discovered significant voltage dissipation in certain branching points. Also, it was found that Angiotensin 2 was inhibiting transmission selectively for microvasculature based on voltage. 
This semester our focus was to find the parameters of our previously extracted mathematical model to match some experimental results specifically this plot which represents the ratios of:
  delta Vresponder/delta Vstimulator. And run a fit function that matches the data points.

 
 
 

 

 



Methods
We used the same mathematical model from the previous paper then changed the MATLAB code to Python with the NUNBA library which offers a Just in time compilation of loops to accelerate our code. Which makes it much faster compared to MATLAB and closer to C/C++ performance. 
Then used different Machine Learning algorithms to find the best parameters to match the mathematical parameters to match the above-mentioned Figure 3 plots. 
The used algorithms where: 
Genetic Algorithms, Bayesian Optimization, Neural Networks, XGboost, and Simulated Annealing which was added recently.

The code structure looks something like this, simulation code:
 


Fitness function for the different ML algorithms:
 


Search space for the algorithms:
 






Results:
From all these algorithms the GA offered the best approximation, the line fit is very close however the voltage time plot is not what we would expect (plots on the right)
   
   
In conclusion, the approach of using GA seems to be promising but the search space needs to be further refined and after examining the original data from Zhang et al (2) we found out that exponential fitting works better for the data, the search space should be reduced from 5 parameters to only 2, and the values restricted, it seems that the most relevant parameter seems to be the Ggap parameter.





References:
1)	Moshkforoush, A., Ashenagar, B., Harraz, O. F., Dabertrand, F., Longden, T. A., Nelson, M. T., & Tsoukias, N. M. (2020). The capillary Kir channel as sensor and amplifier of neuronal signals: Modeling insights on K+-mediated neurovascular communication. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 117(28), 16626-16637.
2)	Zhang, T., Wu, D. M., Xu, G. Z., & Puro, D. G. (2011). The electrotonic architecture of the retinal microvasculature: modulation by angiotensin II. The Journal of physiology, 589(9), 2383-2399.




Mathematical Equations:
Check PDF equations.pdf
Equations ins LaTex format:
\documentclass{article}
\usepackage{amsmath}

\begin{document}

\section*{Membrane Potential Equation}

\begin{equation}
\frac{dV_m}{dt} = -\frac{1}{C_m}(I_{channels} + I_{app}) + \frac{g_{gap}}{C_m \Delta x^2}(\nabla^2 V_m)
\end{equation}

Where:
\begin{align*}
V_m & = \text{membrane potential} \\
C_m & = \text{membrane capacitance} \\
I_{channels} & = \text{sum of ion channel currents} \\
I_{app} & = \text{applied current} \\
g_{gap} & = \text{gap junction conductance} \\
\Delta x & = \text{spatial step size}
\end{align*}

\section*{General Ion Channel Current Equation}

\begin{equation}
I_{channel} = g_{channel} \cdot (V_m - E_{channel})
\end{equation}

Where:
\begin{align*}
g_{channel} & = \text{channel conductance} \\
E_{channel} & = \text{channel reversal potential}
\end{align*}

\section*{Inward Rectifier Potassium Channels (KIR)}

For KIR6\_1, KIR2\_2, KIR1\_2, KIR2\_1, KIR6\_2:
\begin{equation}
I_{KIR} = g_{KIR} \cdot \sqrt{\frac{[K^+]_o}{[K^+]_{ref}}} \cdot (V_m - E_K)
\end{equation}

\section*{Voltage-Gated Potassium Channels (KV)}

For KV7\_4, KV7\_5, KV9\_1, KV9\_3:
\begin{equation}
I_{KV} = g_{KV} \cdot n^4 \cdot (V_m - E_K)
\end{equation}
\begin{equation}
\frac{dn}{dt} = \alpha_n(V_m)(1-n) - \beta_n(V_m)n
\end{equation}

\section*{Calcium-Activated Potassium Channels (KCa)}

For KCA3\_1:
\begin{equation}
I_{KCa} = g_{KCa} \cdot p_o([Ca^{2+}]_i) \cdot (V_m - E_K)
\end{equation}

\section*{TRP Channels}

For TRPC1, TRPC3, TRPC4, TRPC6, TRPM3, TRPM4, TRPM7, TRPML1, TRPP1, TRPP3, TRPV2:
\begin{equation}
I_{TRP} = g_{TRP} \cdot p_o(V_m, [Ca^{2+}]_i) \cdot (V_m - E_{TRP})
\end{equation}

\section*{IP3 Receptors}

For IP3R1, IP3R2, IP3R3:
\begin{equation}
J_{IP3R} = v_{IP3R} \cdot p_o([IP_3], [Ca^{2+}]_i) \cdot ([Ca^{2+}]_{ER} - [Ca^{2+}]_i)
\end{equation}

\section*{Voltage-Gated Calcium Channels}

For CAV1\_2, CAV1\_3, CAV2\_1, CAV3\_1, CAV3\_2:
\begin{equation}
I_{Ca} = g_{Ca} \cdot m^2 \cdot h \cdot (V_m - E_{Ca})
\end{equation}

\section*{ORAI Channels}

For ORAI1, ORAI3:
\begin{equation}
I_{ORAI} = g_{ORAI} \cdot p_o([Ca^{2+}]_{ER}) \cdot (V_m - E_{ORAI})
\end{equation}

Where:
\begin{align*}
g_x & = \text{conductance of channel x} \\
V_m & = \text{membrane potential} \\
E_x & = \text{reversal potential for ion x} \\
[\text{ion}]_y & = \text{concentration of ion in compartment y} \\
p_o & = \text{open probability (function of voltage and/or ion concentrations)} \\
\alpha, \beta & = \text{voltage-dependent rate constants} \\
J_{IP3R} & = \text{IP3 receptor flux} \\
v_{IP3R} & = \text{maximum IP3 receptor flux rate}
\end{align*}

\end{document}Simulation Parameters:
Variable Name/Value	Variable explanation
Vm = -33*ones(1,Ng);	Vm array of membrane potential for each of the 200 cells , all =-33
	
cm = 9.4;	%micro farad / cm^2 %specific capacitane
dx = 0.06;	%cm cell size 60 micrometer
g_gap = g_gap_value;	G_gap value passed as a command line argument to the script the simulation increases it gradually by 0.01 increments, the goal is to run simulations from G_gap value ranging from 0.01 to 100 using brute force
z_K  = 1;	% K ion valence
delta_V_kir  = 25;	% [mV]	voltage diff at half-max.
G_kirbar = 0.94;	% [nS/mM^0.5] inward rectifier constant
n_kir = 0.5;	% inward rectifier constant
E_bg = -30;	% [mV] resting membrane potential
ratio=0.7;	% [mM0.5] Gbg to Gkirbar ratio
G_bg = ratio*G_kirbar;	[nS] background conductance
I_bg	Array containing the I_bg current for each of the 200 cell calculated from the first paper (1) equations
I_kir	Array containing the kir current for each of the 200 cell calculated from the first paper (1) equations









Other Ion Channels parameters (Not currently part of the simulation):
Channel	E 	G	Source
KIR6_1	-80 to -90 mV	10-30 pS	https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/pdf/10.1080/09687680110047373

https://bpspubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/bph.16390

https://academic.oup.com/cardiovascres/article/79/4/621/345141

KIR2_2	Similar to KIR2_1	34–42 pS	https://channelpedia.epfl.ch/wikipages/43

KIR1_2	NA	NA	NA (Maybe can use KIR1_1 as proxy? Kir channels generally exhibit inward rectification with conductance values around 30-40 pS and 70-80 pS for different subtypes. Kir1.1, a related channel, has a slope conductance of 32.1 pS.

The equilibrium potential for K+ (potassium) ions, which Kir channels conduct, is typically around -90 mV in physiological conditions. The exact value can vary depending on the intracellular and extracellular K+ concentrations.
KIR2_1	
-40 mV and -80 mV	21 pS or 29.1 ± 1.6 pS	https://channelpedia.epfl.ch/wikipages/42

KIR6_2	Two types large uses 55–90 pS	NA?? -90 mV for K channel in general?	https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2269954/
https://channelpedia.epfl.ch/wikipages/54


KV7_4	NA	NA	NA
KV7_5	NA	NA	NA
KV9_1	NA	NA	NA
KV9_3	-90 mV proxy with other K channels	8.5 to 14.5 pS	https://channelpedia.epfl.ch/wikipages/32/#Kinetics
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8560416/

KCA3_1	-90 mV by proxy	NA	https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8560416/

KCNK1_2	-90 mV	34 pS	https://www.uniprot.org/uniprotkb/O00180/entry
KCNK2_3	-90 mV	34 pS	https://www.uniprot.org/uniprotkb/O00180/entry
TRPC1	30 mV	17 pS	https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/TRPC1
TRPC3	NA	66.0 pS	https://www.guidetopharmacology.org/GRAC/ObjectDisplayForward?objectId=488
TRPC4	NA	NA	NA
TRPC6	NA	NA	NA
TRPM3	NA	NA	NA
TRPM4	NA	NA	NA
TRPM7	NA	40-105 pS	https://www.guidetopharmacology.org/GRAC/ObjectDisplayForward?objectId=499
TRPML1	NA	NA	NA
TRPP1	NA	NA	NA
TRPP3	NA	NA	NA
TRPV2	NA	NA	NA
IP3R1	NA	NA	NA
IP3R2	NA	NA	NA
IP3R3	NA	NA	NA
CAV1_2	-80	25 pS	https://www.guidetopharmacology.org/GRAC/ObjectDisplayForward?objectId=528
CAV1_3	-80	15-16 pS	https://www.guidetopharmacology.org/GRAC/ObjectDisplayForward?objectId=530&familyId=80&familyType=IC
CAV2_1	-90	9, 14 and 17pS	https://www.guidetopharmacology.org/GRAC/ObjectDisplayForward?objectId=532&familyId=80&familyType=IC
CAV3_1	-80	7.3 pS	https://www.guidetopharmacology.org/GRAC/ObjectDisplayForward?objectId=535&familyId=80&familyType=IC
CAV3_2	55.9 mV	9.1 pS	https://www.guidetopharmacology.org/GRAC/ObjectDisplayForward?objectId=536&familyId=80&familyType=IC
ORAI1	NA	NA	NA
ORAI3	NA	NA	NA
CACC	NA	NA	NA
CIC_2	NA	NA	NA
ASIC2	NA	NA	NA
NAV1_2	5.9 mV	19 pS	https://www.guidetopharmacology.org/GRAC/ObjectDisplayForward?objectId=579
NAV1_3	-24.0	NA	https://www.guidetopharmacology.org/GRAC/ObjectDisplayForward?objectId=580&familyId=82&familyType=IC
P2X1	NA	NA	NA
P2X4	NA	NA	NA
PIEZO1	NA	NA	NA
TPC1	NA	NA	NA
TPC2	NA	NA	NA


REVIEW
published: 18 December 2020
doi: 10.3389/fncel.2020.601324
Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 1 December 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 601324
Edited by:
Fabrice Dabertrand,
University of Colorado, United States
Reviewed by:
Chiara Bianca Maria Platania,
University of Catania, Italy
Frank Faraci,
The University of Iowa, United States
*Correspondence:
Thomas A. Longden
thomas.longden@som.umaryland.edu
†These authors have contributed
equally to this work
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Non-Neuronal Cells,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience
Received: 31 August 2020
Accepted: 13 November 2020
Published: 18 December 2020
Citation:
Hariharan A, Weir N, Robertson C,
He L, Betsholtz C and Longden TA
(2020) The Ion Channel and GPCR
Toolkit of Brain Capillary Pericytes.
Front. Cell. Neurosci. 14:601324.
doi: 10.3389/fncel.2020.601324
The Ion Channel and GPCR Toolkit of
Brain Capillary Pericytes
Ashwini Hariharan1†, Nick Weir 1†, Colin Robertson1
, Liqun He2
, Christer Betsholtz 2,3 and
Thomas A. Longden1
*
1 Department of Physiology, School of Medicine, University of Maryland, Baltimore, MD, United States, 2 Rudbeck Laboratory,
Department of Immunology, Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, 3 Department of Medicine
Huddinge (MedH), Karolinska Institutet & Integrated Cardio Metabolic Centre, Huddinge, Sweden
Brain pericytes reside on the abluminal surface of capillaries, and their processes cover
∼90% of the length of the capillary bed. These cells were first described almost 150 years
ago (Eberth, 1871; Rouget, 1873) and have been the subject of intense experimental
scrutiny in recent years, but their physiological roles remain uncertain and little is known
of the complement of signaling elements that they employ to carry out their functions.
In this review, we synthesize functional data with single-cell RNAseq screens to explore
the ion channel and G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) toolkit of mesh and thin-strand
pericytes of the brain, with the aim of providing a framework for deeper explorations of the
molecular mechanisms that govern pericyte physiology. We argue that their complement
of channels and receptors ideally positions capillary pericytes to play a central role in
adapting blood flow to meet the challenge of satisfying neuronal energy requirements
from deep within the capillary bed, by enabling dynamic regulation of their membrane
potential to influence the electrical output of the cell. In particular, we outline how
genetic and functional evidence suggest an important role for Gs-coupled GPCRs and
ATP-sensitive potassium (KATP) channels in this context. We put forth a predictive model
for long-range hyperpolarizing electrical signaling from pericytes to upstream arterioles,
and detail the TRP and Ca2+ channels and Gq, Gi/o, and G12/13 signaling processes
that counterbalance this. We underscore critical questions that need to be addressed to
further advance our understanding of the signaling topology of capillary pericytes, and
how this contributes to their physiological roles and their dysfunction in disease.
Keywords: pericytes, ion channels, GPCRs (G protein coupled receptors), neurovascular coupling (NVC), cerebral
blood flow (CBF), KATP channels, brain metabolism
INTRODUCTION
A combination of autonomic signaling (Cipolla et al., 2004; Hamel, 2006) and intrinsic pressure
sensing and metabolic autoregulatory mechanisms (Bayliss, 1902; Paulson et al., 1990) drives
continual adjustments in global and local blood flow in the brain. Importantly, as the brain lacks
substantial energy stores it must be able to rapidly adapt local blood flow to fluctuating neuronal
metabolic needs to provide adequate oxygen and glucose delivery. This is achieved through the ondemand process of functional hyperemia (FH), where increases in neural activity—which can span
orders of magnitude in milliseconds—are met with an increase in local blood flow within seconds.
This call-and-response phenomenon is underlain by a complex range of stratified mechanisms,
collectively termed neurovascular coupling (NVC), which have inbuilt redundancy to ensure the
fidelity of the blood flow response.
Hariharan et al. CNS Pericyte Ion Channels and GPCRs
Significant inroads toward a full understanding of these NVC
mechanisms have been made in recent years (Iadecola, 2017), and
in particular ion channel and GPCR signaling networks within
and between the cells of the neurovascular unit [NVU; neurons,
astrocytes, smooth muscle cells (SMCs), endothelial cells (ECs),
and pericytes] are emerging as major contributors (Longden
et al., 2016). However, capillary pericytes represent a relative
blind spot in our knowledge, and our understanding of their
involvement in brain blood flow control is less well-developed
than that for other cells of the NVU. Accordingly, the purpose of
this review is to survey the signaling toolkit that mesh and thinstrand pericytes may employ to contribute to the control of blood
flow throughout the brain. To this end, we leverage data from
recent brain single-cell RNAseq (scRNAseq) screens (He et al.,
2018; Vanlandewijck et al., 2018; Zeisel et al., 2018) to profile
the expression of ion channels (Table 1) and GPCRs (Table 2) in
brain capillary pericytes which, when synthesized with functional
results, may aid in delineating their physiological roles.
An important caveat with this approach is that mRNA
expression does not necessarily predict protein levels (Liu
et al., 2016), and we thus stress that it is essential that the
hypotheses generated by transcriptomic data be subject to
further experimental scrutiny. Accordingly, while the following
discussion is based on robust mRNA expression data, we
highlight where there is question of whether gene expression
translates into functional channels or receptors. A second
putative caveat relates to the quality of the scRNAseq data.
Specifically, it is important to ask if low-level mRNA counts
reflect true and physiologically meaningful expression or artifacts
such as contamination of the pericyte transcriptomes by mRNA
from other cell types. Pericytes in particular are sensitive
to endothelial contamination because of the tight physical
association between these two cell types. With these caveats in
mind, to arrive at a list of genes with reasonable likelihood
of pericyte expression we first selected genes detected at
levels >1 average count per cell in the 1,088 adult brain
pericytes present in the Vanlandewijck et al. dataset (http://
betsholtzlab.org/VascularSingleCells/database.html; He et al.,
2018; Vanlandewijck et al., 2018) and compared this to their
expression in the Zeisel dataset (http://mousebrain.org; Zeisel
et al., 2018). In the latter, three pericyte clusters are provided
(PER1, PER2, PER3) of which PER1 and PER2 are endothelial
cell contaminated, whereas PER3 appears pure. After manually
checking for signs of contamination by comparing the expression
level in pericytes with expression in other brain cell types, we
selected the following criteria as qualifying: (i) expression in >3%
of the pericytes in the Vanlandewijck dataset and; (ii) detectable
expression (>0) in the Zeisel et al. PER3 dataset (Figure 1).
Below, we focus our discussion on the ion channels and
GPCRs that are likely to be most pertinent to blood flow control.
We center our discussion on studies using acute and in vivo
preparations, as cultured pericytes may exhibit phenotypic drift
which confounds interpretation. Accordingly, we note instances
in which we refer to cultured pericytes. We begin by briefly
reviewing the key features of the brain vasculature and pericytes
before exploring their ion channel and GPCR complement
in detail.
THE VASCULAR NETWORK OF THE BRAIN
Fundamental Angioarchitecture
From pial arteries on the brains surface, penetrating arterioles
branch orthogonally and dive into the parenchyma (Duvernoy
et al., 1981; Cipolla, 2009; Figure 2). Arteries and arterioles are
composed of a lumen lined by electrically-coupled cobblestone–
morphology ECs (Haas and Duling, 1997) that directly interface
with the blood. These ECs are surrounded by a fenestrated
internal elastic lamina (IEL), composed mainly of elastin and
collagen (Schwartz et al., 1981), through which they extend
projections to directly contact overlying contractile smooth
muscle cells (SMCs) (Aydin et al., 1991).
As the penetrating arteriole extends deeper into the tissue,
further vessels sprout from its length at regular intervals (Blinder
et al., 2013). These initial branch points are sites of precapillary
sphincters which are regulated over short time scales to control
blood flowing into the capillary bed (Grubb et al., 2020). From
this point, extensive ramification of the vascular bed greatly
expands the surface area of the network, facilitating efficient
exchange of nutrients and waste to rapidly satisfy the intense
metabolic requirements of every neuron. The capillary bed—
consisting of capillary ECs (cECs; Garcia and Longden, 2020)
and overlying pericytes (see below) embedded in the basement
membrane (a dense network of glycoproteins, collagens and
secreted factors; Pozzi et al., 2017)—is incredibly dense, and
each microliter of cortex holds approximately 1 m of blood
vessels (Shih et al., 2015). Of these, around 90% by volume are
capillaries (Gould et al., 2017). Accordingly, ECs are estimated
to comprise around 30% of the non-neuronal cell mass in the
gray matter, forming a network of 20–25 billion ECs throughout
the entire human brain (von Bartheld et al., 2016). This places
cECs in close apposition with all neurons, with each neuronal
cell body lying within ∼15µm of a vessel (Tsai et al., 2009).
Red blood cells (RBCs) traverse this network, releasing oxygen
to diffuse down its concentration gradient into the tissue, while
glucose is transported by ECs from the blood plasma into the
parenchyma. After negotiating the capillary bed, oxygen-depleted
RBCs eventually reach a vertically-oriented venule, which drain
to veins at the cortical surface on the path back to the heart.
Mural Cell Properties Transition Gradually
With Increasing Branch Order
As the vascular bed ramifies from the penetrating arteriole, there
is gradation in the morphology and functional characteristics of
the mural cells associated with vessels. The first 3–4 branches
of the vascular network (1st to 4th order) originating from the
penetrating arteriole constitute a “transitional zone” (Ratelade
et al., 2020). These vessels are covered by cells expressing high
levels of α-smooth muscle actin (α-SMA) with ovoid cell bodies
and multiple broad processes that almost completely ensheathe
the underlying vessel (Grant et al., 2019; Figure 3A). Given that
the identity of these cells is unresolved, and that they have been
referred to as both pericytes (Peppiatt et al., 2006; Hall et al., 2014;
Attwell et al., 2016; Grant et al., 2019) and SMCs (Hill et al., 2015;
Grutzendler and Nedergaard, 2019), we refer to these cells here
as “contractile mural cells” and to the segments of the vasculature
Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 2 December 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 601324
Hariharan et al. CNS Pericyte Ion Channels and GPCRs
TABLE 1 | Ion channels expressed by CNS capillary pericytes.
Channel
protein
Gene mRNA
average
counts/cell*
Ion selectivity Endogenous
activators and key
modulators
Key properties Key references
Kir6.1 Kcnj8 1670.21 K+ ATP:ADP, UDP,
Gq/Gs signaling
Weakly rectifying; Forms
KATP channel with SUR2 to
mediate
metabolism-electrical
coupling
Ishizaki et al., 2009
Kir2.2 Kcnj12 31.01 K+ K
+,
hyperpolarization
Strongly rectifying;
Propagation of
hyperpolarizing signals
Matsushita and Puro, 2006;
Longden and Nelson, 2015;
Longden et al., 2017
Depolarization
Negative feedback
regulation of Vm;
Kv currents have been
reported in peripheral
pericytes
Nelson and Quayle, 1995;
von Beckerath et al., 2000;
Quignard et al., 2003
Kv1.2 Kcna2 1.25 K+
Kv2.1 Kcnb1 4.11 K+
Kv6.1 Kcng1 8.75 K+
Kv7.4 Kcnq4 7.7 K+
Kv7.5 Kcnq5 1.48 K+
Kv9.1 Kcns1 1.66 K+
Kv9.3 Kcns3 3.21 K+
K2P3.1 Kcnk3 9.8 K+ pH Activation in response to
moderate rise in pH
Duprat et al., 1997
KNa1.2 Kcnt2 5.87 K+ Intracellular Na+,
Cl−
Maintaining resting Vm;
Sensitive to cell volume
changes; Inactivated by
ADP and ATP
Bhattacharjee et al., 2003;
Tejada et al., 2014
KCa2.3 Kcnn3 1.81 K+ Intracellular Ca2+ Hyperpolarization in
response to Ca2+ elevation;
Taylor et al., 2003; Adelman
et al., 2012
TRPC1 Trpc1 16.04 Na+, K+, Ca2+ n.da Store-operated Ca2+ entry
in association with STIM1
and Orai1
Huang et al., 2006; Cheng
et al., 2008
TRPC3 Trpc3 266.99 pCa2+/pNa+: 1.6
Na+, K+, Ca2+
Gq signaling, DAG Facilitates Ca2+ entry;
Depolarizes Vm
Xi et al., 2009; Kochukov
et al., 2014
TRPC4 Trpc4 67.83 pCa2+/pNa+:
1.1-7.7
Na+, K+, Ca2+
Gi/o/Gq signaling Activated by Gi/o-GPCR
signaling
Albert, 2011; Jeon et al.,
2012
TRPC6 Trpc6 5.94 pCa2+/pNa+: 5
Na+, K+, Ca2+
Gq signaling,
arachidonic acid,
lysophosphatidylcholine,
20-HETE
Mechanosensation; Ca2+
influx through TRPC6 can
sensitize IP3R to cause
Ca2+ release
Gonzales et al., 2014
TRPM3 Trpm3 1.04 pCa2+/pNa+: 1.6
Na+, K+, Ca2+,
Mg2+**
Sphingosine,
sphinganine,
NN-dimethyl-Derythrosphingosine,
pregnenolone sulfate
Steroid signaling;
Lipid signaling;
Mechanosensation
Grimm et al., 2005; Wagner
et al., 2008
TRPM4 Trpm4 21.32 Na+, K+ PIP2, intracellular
Ca2+
Permeable to monovalent
cations; Depolarizes Vm in
response to Ca2+ elevations
Gonzales et al., 2014
TRPM7 Trpm7 104.35 pCa2+/pNa+: 0.34
Na+, K+, Ca2+,
Mg2+
PIP2 Mg2+ homeostasis; Can
modulate store-operated
Ca2+ entry;
pH sensitive;
Schlingmann et al., 2007;
Souza Bomfim et al., 2020
TRPML1 Mcoln1 39.53 Na+, K+, Ca2+,
Mg2+
Phosphatidyl (3,5)
inositol
bisphosphate
Lysosomal ion homeostasis Venkatachalam et al., 2015
TRPP1 Pkd2 117.24 Na+, K+, Ca2+ Intracellular Ca2+ Large Ca2+ conductance;
Mechanosensation in
association with PKD1
Sharif-Naeini et al., 2009;
Narayanan et al., 2013
(Continued)
Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 3 December 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 601324
Hariharan et al. CNS Pericyte Ion Channels and GPCRs
TABLE 1 | Continued
Channel
protein
Gene mRNA
average
counts/cell*
Ion selectivity Endogenous
activators and key
modulators
Key properties Key references
TRPP3 Pkd2l2 1.3 pCa2+/pNa+: 4-4.3
Na+, K+, Ca2+,
Mg2+
n.d pH sensitive Inada et al., 2008
TRPV2 Trpv2 98.6 pCa2+/pNa+:
0.9-2.9
Na+, K+, Ca2+,
Mg2+
n.d Mechanosensitive - detects
cell swelling/stretch
Perálvarez-Marín et al.,
2013
IP3R1 Itpr1 209.62 Ca2+
IP3, cytosolic Ca2+
Mediate Ca2+ release from
endoplasmic reticulum
upon binding of IP3;
Participate in many
intracellular Ca2+ signaling
processes
Foskett et al., 2007;
Berridge, 2016
IP3R2 Itpr2 250.43 Ca2+
IP3R3 Itpr3 1.73 Ca2+
Cav1.2 Cacna1c 99.46
Ca2+ Depolarization
Ca2+ entry in response to
depolarization or at resting;
Vm; L-type Ca2+ currents
recorded in retinal pericytes Sakagami et al., 1999;
Perez-Reyes, 2003
Cav1.3 Cacna1d 2.48
Cav2.1 Cacna1a 1.05
Cav3.1 Cacna1g 1.73
Cav3.2 Cacna1h 42.59
Orai1 Orai1 22.88
Ca2+
ER Ca2+ depletion
Store operated Ca2+
entry channels;
Associate with STIM1 to
permit Ca2+ entry upon
store depletion
Orai3 Orai3 99.94 Prakriya and Lewis, 2015
CaCC
(TMEM16A)
Ano1 329.91 Cl− Intracellular Ca2+ Membrane depolarization in
response to increased
Ca2+; CaCC currents
reported in retinal and
peripheral pericytes
Sakagami et al., 1999;
Hashitani et al., 2018
ClC-2 Clcn2 19.95 Cl− Hyperpolarization,
arachidonic acid
Repolarization of Vm;
Sensitive to intracellular ATP
and ADP
Nilius and Droogmans,
2003; Stölting et al., 2013;
Bi et al., 2014
ASIC2 Asic2 4.52 pNa+/pCa2+: 20
pNa+/pK
+: 10
Na+, K+, Ca2+
Extracellular H+ Activated by extracellular
acidification
Gannon et al., 2008;
Sherwood et al., 2012
Nav1.2 Scn2a 3.02 Na+
Depolarization
Na+ influx in response to
membrane depolarization;
Nav1.3 is expressed in
peripheral pericytes
Yu and Catterall, 2003; LeeNa Kwon et al., 2007 v1.3 Scn3a 1.53 Na+
P2X1 P2rx1 10.53
Na+, K+, Ca2+ ATP Local ATP sensors Khakh et al., 2001
P2X4 P2rx4 23.6
Piezo1 Piezo1 2.09 Na+, K+, Ca2+,
Mg2+
Mechanically
activated
Senses and couples shear
stress with cation entry
Coste et al., 2010; Li et al.,
2014
TPC1 Tpcn1 36.44
Na+, K+, Ca2+ Phosphatidyl
(3,5) inositol
bisphosphate
Located on
endosomal/lysosomal
membranes;
NAADP-induced
Ca2+ release
Calcraft et al., 2009;
Pitt et al., 2016
TPC2 Tpcn2 6.01
Naming conventions used throughout conform to those outlined in the IUPHAR/BPS Guide to Pharmacology (Armstrong et al., 2020). Permeability ratios are noted in bold where
appropriate. Abbreviations not used elsewhere: NAADP, nicotinic acid adenine dinucleotide phosphate.
an.d., no data.
*Data from He et al. (2018) and Vanlandewijck et al. (2018), expressed as average counts per cell annotated as a brain pericyte. Cells were isolated from adult mice of either sex aged
10–19 weeks.
**Permeability for short-pore sequence isoform TRPM3α2.
Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 4 December 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 601324
Hariharan et al. CNS Pericyte Ion Channels and GPCRs
TABLE 2 | G protein coupled receptors expressed by CNS capillary pericytes.
Receptor Gene mRNA
average
counts/cell*
Principal
G-protein**
GPCR
sub-class
Endogenous
agonists
Signal transduction
effects; roles
Key references
Adenosine receptors
A1 receptor Adora1 1.96 Gi/o A Adenosine ↓ cAMP;
Arterial vasoconstriction
Borea et al., 2018
A2A receptor Adora2a 85.45 Gs ↑ cAMP;
Arterial vasorelaxation
A2B receptor Adora2b 6.52 Gs ↑ cAMP;
Arterial vasorelaxation
Adrenoceptors
α1A-adrenoreceptor Adra1a 1.44 Gq A Epinephrine >
norepinephrine
↑ IP3/DAG;
Arterial vasoconstriction
Hieble and Ruffolo, 1997;
Guimarães and Moura,
2001; Muszkat et al., 2005;
Silva and Zanesco, 2010;
de Oliveira et al., 2019
α1B-adrenoreceptor Adra1b 1.29 Gq
α2A-adrenoreceptor Adra2a 1.73 Gi/o ↓ cAMP;
α Arterial vasoconstriction 2B-adrenoreceptor Adra2b 2.03 Gi/o
β2-adrenoreceptor Adrb2 1.65 Gs ↑ cAMP;
Vasodilation
Calcitonin
receptor-like
receptor
Calcrl 37.46 Gs B CGRP >
Adrenomedullin
Non-functional alone,
requires a RAMP.
Likely colocalizes with
RAMP2 to form AM1
receptors in pericytes
Poyner et al., 2002
Chemerin receptor 1 Cmklr1 3.49 Gi/o A Resolvin E1 >
Chemerin
↓ cAMP; Vasoconstrictor
with a role in inflammation
De Henau et al., 2016;
Kennedy et al., 2016
Chemokine receptors
CCR9 Ccr9 25.5 Gi/o A CCL25 ↑ Ca2+;
Activation of adaptive
immune response;
Leukocyte recruitment
Watts et al., 2013; Mazzotti
et al., 2017
CXCR4 Cxcr4 1.44 Gi/o CXCL12
CCRL2 Ccrl2 85.53 n.da CCL19 Anchors and presents
chemerin to
Cmklr1-expressing cells
Endothelin receptors
ETA receptor Ednra 236.01 Gq A Endothelin-1 >
endothelin-2 >
endothelin-3
Vasoconstriction in SMCs;
Extracellular matrix
production and
inflammation
Patel et al., 2014; Maguire
and Davenport, 2015;
Urtatiz and Van
Raamsdonk, 2016
ETB receptor Ednrb 20.99 Gs, Gi/o, Gq ↑ IP3/DAG/PLA2/PLD;
Vasodilation in ECs,
vasoconstriction in SMCs
FFA2 receptor Ffar2 6.47 Gq A Free fatty acids ↑ IP3/DAG;
Roles in metabolism and
inflammation
Li et al., 2018
GIP receptor Gipr 8.48 Gs B Gastric inhibitory
polypeptide
↑ cAMP;
Increases blood flow in
adipose microvessels
Asmar et al., 2019
GPER Gper1 716.19 Gi/o A 17β-estradiol Diverse genomic and
non-genomic roles;
Vasodilation, likely via
secondary Gs coupling
Prossnitz and Arterburn,
2015; Evans et al., 2016
Kisspeptin receptor Kiss1r 1.93 Gq A Kisspeptin10,−13,−14,−54,−52
↑ IP3/DAG;
Vasoconstrictor, inhibits
angiogenesis
Sawyer et al., 2011;
Cvetkovic et al., 2013 ´
(Continued)
Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 5 December 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 601324
Hariharan et al. CNS Pericyte Ion Channels and GPCRs
TABLE 2 | Continued
Receptor Gene mRNA
average
counts/cell*
Principal
G-protein**
GPCR
sub-class
Endogenous
agonists
Signal transduction
effects; roles
Key references
Leukotriene receptors
CysLT1 Cysltr1 9 Gq A LTD4 > LTC4 > LTE4
LTC4 > LTD4 > LTE4
↑ IP3/DAG;
Vascular permeability, SMC
contraction, immune cell
activation
Zhang et al., 2006;
Woszczek et al., 2007;
Thiriet, 2013
CysLT2 Cysltr2 35.81 Gq
Lysophospholipid receptors
LPA1 Lpar1 8.29 Gi/o, Gq,
G12/13
A LPA ↓ cAMP;
↑IP3/DAG and PLA2;
Vasoconstrictor
Means and Brown, 2009;
Cheng et al., 2012; Aoki
et al., 2016; Pébay and
Wong, 2017; Masago et al.,
2018
LPA6 Lpar6 19.76 G12/13 A LPA ↑ cAMP;
↑ IP3/DAG;
BBB permeability
S1P1 S1pr1 5.88 Gi/o A S1P >
sphingosylphosphorylcholine >
LPA
↓ cAMP;
↑ IP3/DAG and PLD;
Leukocyte recruitment,
↓ vascular permeability
S1P2 S1pr2 20.32 Gi/o, Gq,
G12/13
A S1P >
sphingosylphosphorylcholine
↑ cAMP;
↑ IP3/DAG;
↓ chemotaxis, ↑ vascular
permeability
S1P3 S1pr3 936.18 Gi/o, Gq,
G12/13
A S1P >
sphingosylphosphorylcholine
↓ cAMP;
↑ IP3/DAG;
Vasoconstriction via SMCs,
vasorelaxation via ECs;
Angiogenesis
Metabotropic glutamate receptors
mGlu3 receptor Grm3 206.24 Gi/o C Glutamate > NAAG ↓ cAMP;
Inhibits glial non-vesicular
glutamate release and
neuronal synaptic plasticity
Wroblewska et al., 1998;
Harrison et al., 2008;
Palazzo et al., 2016; Yudin
and Rohacs, 2018
mGlu7 receptor Grm7 94.26 Gi/o C Glutamate >
L-serine-O-phosphate
↓ cAMP;
Low glutamate affinity,
auto-inhibition of glutamate
release
NOP receptor Oprl1 12.02 Gi/o A Nociceptin/orphanin
FQ
↓ cAMP;
Bradycardia, hypotension
upon systemic
administration of agonist
Kapusta et al., 2002
PAC1 receptor Adcyap1r1 35.51 Gs, Gq B PACAP-27 =
PACAP-38 > VIP, PHI,
PHM, PHV
↑ cAMP;
Potent vasodilator
May et al., 2010; Koide
et al., 2014
PAR1 F2r 141.17 Gi/o, Gq,
G12/13
A Thrombin activated
protein C, MMP1,
MMP13
Haematopoietic
development, vascular
development, peripheral
vasodilation, hypotension,
bradycardia
Cheung et al., 1998; Yue
et al., 2012
PTH1 receptor Pth1r 226.03 Gs B PTH = PTHrP-1, TIP39 ↑ cAMP; Systemic mineral
homeostasis
Mahon, 2012
Prostanoid receptors
DP2 receptor Ptgdr2 2 Gi/o A PGD2 > PGF2α >
PGE2 > PGI2,
thromboxane A2 PGD3,
PGJ2
↓ cAMP;
Vasodilation, role in
angiogenesis
Praticò and Dogné, 2005;
Kaczynski et al., 2016;
Longden et al., 2019;
Upchurch and Leitinger,
2019; Ozen et al., 2020
EP1 receptor Ptger1 10.87 Gq A PGE2 > PGE1 >
PGF2α > PGI2 > PGD2
> thromboxane A2
↑ IP3/DAG;
Role in NVC
EP3 receptor Ptger3 5.74 Gi/o A PGE2 > PGE1 >
PGF2α > PGI2 > PGD2
> thromboxane A2
↓ cAMP
(Continued)
Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 6 December 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 601324
Hariharan et al. CNS Pericyte Ion Channels and GPCRs
TABLE 2 | Continued
Receptor Gene mRNA
average
counts/cell*
Principal
G-protein**
GPCR
sub-class
Endogenous
agonists
Signal transduction
effects; roles
Key references
FP receptor Ptgfr 13.26 Gq A PGF2α > PGD2 >
PGE2, PGI2 >
thromboxane A2
↑ IP3/DAG;
Angiogenesis, matrix
remodeling
IP receptor Ptgir 2.7 Gs A PGI2 > PGE1 > PGD2,
PGF2α > thromboxane
A2
PGE2
↑ cAMP;
Released from ECs, drives
vasodilation, angiogenesis
TP receptor Tbxa2r 282.65 Gq A Thromboxane A2 =
PGH2 > PGD2, PGE2,
PGF2α, PGI2,
↑ IP3/DAG; vasoconstriction
Purinergic receptors
P2Y12 receptor P2ry12 3.56 Gi/o A ADP > ATP ↓ cAMP;
Platelet aggregation;
Microglial migration;
Vasoconstriction
Sasaki et al., 2003;
Wihlborg et al., 2004
P2Y14 receptor P2ry14 1291.7 Gi/o A UDP = UDP-glucose >
UDP-galactose >
UDP-glucoronic acid >
UDP-N-acetylglucosamine
↓ cAMP;
inflammatory/immune
responses
Harden et al., 2010
V1A receptor Avpr1a 1.08 Gq A Vasopressin > oxytocin ↑ IP3/DAG;
Vasoconstriction
Yang et al., 2010
Y1 receptor Npy1r 39.94 Gi/o A Neuropeptide Y =
peptide YY >
pancreatic polypeptide
↓ cAMP;
Inhibits glutamatergic
neurotransmission; Vascular
remodeling;
Vasoconstriction
Crnkovic et al., 2014;
Huang and Thathiah, 2015
Adhesion receptors
CELSR2 Celsr2 1.03 n.d Adhesion Orphan ↑ Ca2+;
CamKII and Jun kinase
activity
Shima et al., 2007; Cortijo
et al., 2012; Sugimura et al.,
2012
Frizzled receptors
FZD1 Fzd1 4.86 Canonical Wnt
signaling
Frizzled Wnt-1, Wnt-2, Wnt-3A,
Wnt-5A, Wnt-7B
Pericyte motility and polarity
during angiogenesis
Nichols et al., 2013;
Dijksterhuis et al., 2014;
Kilander et al., 2014; Yuan
et al., 2015; Corda and
Sala, 2017; Henno et al.,
2017; Hot et al., 2017;
Zimmerli, 2018; Kozielewicz
et al., 2020
FZD3 Fzd3 14.53 Gs Frizzled Wnt-2, Wnt-3A,
Wnt-5A
Decoy receptor, dampens
Wg signaling
FZD6 Fzd6 129.87 Gi/o, Gq/11 Frizzled Wnt-3A, Wnt-4,
Wnt-5A, Wnt-5B,
Wnt-7A
Cell proliferation,
differentiation and polarity
FZD7 Fzd7 3.72 Gs, Gi/o,
Canonical Wnt
signaling
Frizzled Wnt-3, Wnt-3A,
Wnt-5A, Wnt-7A
Pericyte motility and polarity
during angiogenesis
FZD8 Fzd8 4.83 Putative
Canonical Wnt
signaling
Frizzled Wnt-2, Wnt-3A,
Wnt-9B
n.d
FZD10 Fzd10 1.36 Canonical Wnt
signaling
Frizzled Wnt7A, Wnt-7B Putative role in CNS
angiogenesis
SMO Smo 19.64 Gi/o, G12/13 Frizzled Constitutively active;
oxysterols?
Angiogenesis, remodeling,
proliferation and NO release
in ECs
(Continued)
Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 7 December 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 601324
Hariharan et al. CNS Pericyte Ion Channels and GPCRs
TABLE 2 | Continued
Receptor Gene mRNA
average
counts/cell*
Principal
G-protein**
GPCR
sub-class
Endogenous
agonists
Signal transduction
effects; roles
Key references
Orphan receptors
GPR4 Gpr4 85.06 Gs, Gi/o, Gq,
G12/13
A H+ ↑ cAMP
↑ IP3/DAG
Pro-inflammatory in ECs
Tobo et al., 2007; Li et al.,
2015; Weiß et al., 2017;
Carvalho et al., 2020
GPR19 Gpr19 15.87 Gs A H+ ↑ cAMP;
Pro-inflammatory in ECs
GPR20 Gpr20 4.93 n.d A n.d n.d
GPR157 Gpr157 1.18 n.d None n.d n.d
GPR182 Gpr182 17.83 n.d A Adrenomedullin n.d
GPRC5B Gprc5b 1.04 n.d C n.d Regulation of vascular SMC
tone
GPRC5C Gprc5c 385.48 G12/13 C n.d Reinforces β-catenin and
Wnt signaling
LGR4 Lgr4 10.67 Non-classical A R-spondin1-4 Implicated role in lipid
metabolism
OPN3 Opn3 1.59 n.d A n.d n.d
TPRA1 Tpra1 52.7 Gi/o 7TM N/A n.d Singh et al., 2015
The GABAB subunit GABAB1 is also expressed by pericytes, but is not included here due to the apparent absence of GABAB2, required for functional receptors. Abbreviations not used
elsewhere: LPA, lysophosphatidic acid; MMP, matrix metalloproteinase; NAAG, N-acetylaspartylglutamate; PHI, peptide histidine-isoleucine; PHM, peptide histidine-methionine; PHV,
peptide histidine-valine; PLD, phospholipase D; TIP39, Tuberoinfundibular peptide of 39 residues; VIP, vasoactive intestinal peptide.
an.d, no data.
*Data from He et al. (2018) and Vanlandewijck et al. (2018), expressed as average counts per cell annotated as a brain pericyte. Cells were isolated from adult mice of either sex aged
10–19 weeks.
**We note here the principal transduction G-protein, although many receptors are promiscuous and couple to secondary transduction pathways. Frizzled receptors canonically couple
to Wnt signaling but may also interact with a rage of G proteins. Where there is no clear primary pathway, we list all possibilities. Readers are referred to Alexander et al. (2019) for further
details.
that they cover as “vessels.” Expression of α-SMA permits these
cells to rapidly regulate the diameter of the underlying vessel and
therefore blood flow. Indeed, multiple studies have illustrated the
importance of contractile mural cells in mediating dilation (of
∼10–30%) in response to neuronal stimulation (Hill et al., 2015;
Mishra et al., 2016; Kisler et al., 2017; Cai et al., 2018; Rungta et al.,
2018).
Beyond this point in the vasculature, mural cells do not
express high levels of α-SMA, although one recent study
suggested that retinal mural cells retain expression of a low
level of this protein (Alarcon-Martinez et al., 2018) and they
do express very low levels of the Acta2 gene in the brain (He
et al., 2018; Vanlandewijck et al., 2018). As a result, these cells are
not equipped to regulate vessel diameter over abrupt time scales,
but there is clear evidence that they may contract slowly under
certain circumstances (reducing the diameter of the underlying
vessel by up to ∼25%; Fernández-Klett et al., 2010; Gonzales
et al., 2020). Thus, we consider the relatively static diameter
vessels downstream of the α-SMA terminus (which typically
occurs between the 1st and 4th order branch in immunostaining
experiments; Grant et al., 2019) to be capillaries. The identity of
mural cells on these so-defined capillaries is unambiguous, and
there is consensus that these cells are pericytes.
The pericytes residing on capillaries display at least two
distinct morphologies: (i) Immediately adjacent to the α-SMA
terminus, pericytes take on a mesh-like appearance, and are thus
known as “mesh pericytes” (Figure 3B); (ii) beyond these are
cells that project long, thin processes along the vasculature, and
accordingly these are referred to as “thin-strand pericytes” (Grant
et al., 2019; Figures 3C,D).
CELLULAR ANATOMY OF MESH AND
THIN-STRAND PERICYTES
Despite differing morphologies (Figure 3), mesh and thinstrand pericytes are indistinguishable at the level of singlecell transcriptomics, possibly due to the fact that mesh
pericytes represent only a small fraction of capillary pericytes
(Chasseigneaux et al., 2018). Pericyte cell bodies have a highly
stereotyped shape, appearing as a large ovoid that protrudes
from the wall of the capillary, which is often referred to as a
“bump-on-a-log” (Grant et al., 2019). Mesh pericytes are few
in number relative to thin-strand pericytes and have fewer,
shorter longitudinal processes (their primary trunks averaging
40µm in length; Hartmann et al., 2015) that cover ∼70% of
the underlying capillary. This contrasts with upstream contractile
mural cells which cover 95% of the underlying vessel (Grant
et al., 2019). Thin-strand pericytes extend long, thin, strand-like
processes that are ∼1.5µm in diameter and cover on average
around 250µm in total capillary distance, in some instances
Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 8 December 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 601324
Hariharan et al. CNS Pericyte Ion Channels and GPCRs
FIGURE 1 | Overview of gene qualification process for pericyte ion channels and GPCRs and other genes of interest. An initial filter of 1 average count/cell was
applied to exclude genes with extremely low expression. (A) Heatmap of expression of the remaining genes throughout the neurovascular unit. A small subset of these
genes were highly enriched in pericytes (top left), while many showed higher expression in other cell types. To filter out potential contamination, genes that were
expressed in <3% of pericytes, and were absent from the PER3 cluster of Zeisel et al. (2018) were excluded. (B) Relationship between pericyte-specificity of
expression and fraction of pericytes expressing each gene considered. Genes represented by green circles were excluded according to the above criteria. (C) High
resolution view of genes with a <0.1 expression ratio in pericytes, that were expressed in fewer than 10% of pericytes, corresponding to the bottom left corner in (B).
Genes represented by green circles were excluded from further consideration as potential contamination.
exceeding 300µm (Berthiaume et al., 2018). Together, the thinstrand pericyte cell body and its processes cover between one
third (Mathiisen et al., 2010) and one half (Grant et al., 2019) of
the abluminal surface area of the endothelium. A typical thinstrand process has a stable “non-terminal core” of ∼50µm in
length that bifurcates into slightly shorter, dynamic terminal
processes that may extend or retract up to 20µm over the course
of days to weeks (Berthiaume et al., 2018). At their terminal
ends, thin-strand processes appear to come into close proximity
with those of neighboring pericytes (Berthiaume et al., 2018),
possibly allowing for direct contact between adjacent pericytes,
although this awaits direct experimental confirmation. Changes
in the length of processes of one cell appear to evoke opposite
changes in the length of adjacent pericyte processes, preventing
the formation of substantial gaps (Berthiaume et al., 2018).
These processes are for the most part prevented from making
direct contact with the underlying endothelium by the basement
membrane. However, electron microscopy has revealed that—
similar to the IEL of arteries and arterioles—the capillary
basement membrane is dotted with many fenestrations, with an
average area of 1.5 µm2
, ranging from 100 to 450 nm in diameter
(Carlson, 1989; Figure 3D). In arteries, similar fenestrations are
Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 9 December 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 601324
Hariharan et al. CNS Pericyte Ion Channels and GPCRs
FIGURE 2 | An overview of brain angioarchitecture. (A) Cross-section of one brain hemisphere illustrating macroscopic vascular architecture. The carotid artery joins
the circle of Willis at the base of the brain, then gives rise to major pial arteries which course over the brain surface, from which multiple penetrating arterioles arise and
dive into the tissue. (B) Close up view of the components of the vascular network approximating the area in the boxed region in A showing the interconnected
organization of pial arteries, penetrating arterioles, the dense capillary network, and venules. The vessel labeling system we use takes the penetrating arteriole as the
0-order vessel and primary reference point, and vessels are numbered sequentially with regard to this. Vessel number automatically increases each time a vessel
branches and thus, after vessel n branches, the daughter branches—regardless of diameter or orientation—are labeled vessel n + 1. (C) Illustration approximating the
boxed region in (B), showing the cellular elements that make up the arteriolar side of the brain vasculature. Arteries and arterioles consist of SMCs surrounding ECs,
which are in direct contact with the blood. The first 3–4 vessels emanating from the penetrating arteriole are a transitional zone and are covered with contractile mural
cells that are positive for α-SMA and can change diameter abruptly. Immediately after the α-actin terminus are capillaries covered by mesh pericytes, following which
are capillaries where thin-strand pericytes reside. The cross-section at right shows a section through an artery/arteriole and illustrates the presence of the internal
elastic lamina (IEL) which separates ECs and SMCs. Occasional fenestrations dot the IEL, through which ECs and SMCs make direct contact via myoendothelial
projections (MEPs, circular inset). These are sites of gap junctions (GJs) permitting chemical and electrical cell-cell communication.
the sites of myoendothelial junctions, optimized for EC-SMC
communication by the presence of a number of key enzymes,
ion channels, and gap junction (GJ) proteins (Straub et al.,
2014). In the capillary bed, these fenestrations are the site of
“peg-socket” interdigitations where either the pericyte or the EC
sends a projection to make contact with the adjacent cell (Tilton
et al., 1979; Cuevas et al., 1984; Armulik et al., 2005). These
contact points are thought to be the sites of GJ communication
between the two cell types (see Box 1), and may be the location
of key signaling events, such as local calcium (Ca2+) or cyclic
adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) elevations. Moreover, they
may be sites of macromolecular signaling complex assembly,
containing ion channels, and GPCRs positioned to facilitate
cell-cell communication.
ION CHANNEL EXPRESSION IN BRAIN
CAPILLARY PERICYTES
A cursory review of the brain capillary pericyte ion channel
expression data provided by He et al. (2018) and Vanlandewijck
et al. (2018) reveals that potassium (K+) channels are
the dominant ion channel species in pericytes. Remarkably,
this is due to the adenosine triphosphate (ATP)-sensitive
K
+ (KATP) channel inward rectifier (Kir) subunit, Kir6.1,
accounting for nearly half of the total ion channel gene
expression in these cells. Transient receptor potential (TRP),
Ca2+, and chloride (Cl−) channels make up the remaining
half, along with lower expression of a handful of other
channel subunits including two-pore channels (TPCs), voltagegated sodium (Na+; Nav) channels, P2X receptors, acid
sensing ion channels (ASICs), and Piezo1 (Table 1 and
Figure 4).
PERICYTE K+ CHANNELS
Focusing initially on the K+ channel superfamily, capillary
pericytes express Kir, two-pore domain (K2P), voltage-gated
(Kv), Na+-activated (KNa), and Ca2+-activated (KCa) K+
channel genes.
Kir-Family Channels May Enable Pericyte
Metabolism-Electrical Coupling and
Facilitate Rapid, Long-Range Electrical
Signaling
Kir channels have the defining biophysical property of inward
rectification, preferentially conducting large currents into the
cell at voltages negative to the K+ equilibrium potential (EK),
the magnitude of which depend on the electrochemical gradient
for K+ [i.e., the difference between Vm and EK] (Katz, 1949;
Hibino et al., 2010). At potentials positive to EK some degree
of rectification occurs, ranging from strong—in which almost
no current passes from the interior of the cell to the exterior—
to weak, in which rectification is only seen at very positive
potentials. Accordingly, Kir channels can be classified by their
Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 10 December 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 601324
Hariharan et al. CNS Pericyte Ion Channels and GPCRs
FIGURE 3 | Cytoarchitecture and microenvironment of pericytes. (A) Mural
cells with a ‘bump-on-a-log’ cell body, with multiple contractile processes that
(Continued)
FIGURE 3 | almost completely encase the underlying vessel. 6,000x, rat
mammary gland vasculature. Reproduced with permission from Fujiwara and
Uehara (1984). (B) A 4,400x magnification scanning electron micrograph of a
putative mesh pericyte of the rat mammary gland. Multiple sparse processes
enwrap the underlying capillary. Reproduced with permission from Fujiwara
and Uehara (1984). (C) A thin-strand pericyte atop a rat retinal capillary,
extending fine processes away from the ovoid cell body. Adapted with
permission from Sakagami et al. (1999). Scale bar: 10µm. (D) Illustration of a
thin-strand pericyte. The bulk of the volume of the cell body is occupied by the
nucleus. The pericyte is prevented from making direct contact with the
underlying EC by the basement membrane, shown in the SEM at bottom left,
reproduced with permission from Carlson (1989). Multiple small fenestrations
are seen in this structure, allowing for pericyte and endothelial projections to
make direct contact with one another, forming so-called ‘peg-socket
junctions’ which are also sites of gap junction formation. At bottom right
electron micrographs depicting a peg-socket junction (left) and a
pericyte-endothelial gap junction (right) are shown, reproduced with
permission from Díaz-Flores et al. (2009) and Carlson (1989). Abbreviations in
micrographs: EC, endothelial cell; N, nerve; P, pericyte.
degree of rectification as strongly-rectifying (Kir2.x, Kir3.x),
intermediately-rectifying (Kir4.x) or weakly-rectifying (Kir1.1,
Kir6.x, Kir7.x). Alternatively, this group of channels can be
classified according to function into classic (Kir2.x), G-protein
sensitive (Kir3.x), KATP (Kir6.x), or K+ transport (Kir1.x, Kir4.x,
Kir5.x, Kir7.x) channels (Hibino et al., 2010). Of the Kir
channel family, capillary pericytes express extremely high levels
of Kir6.1—far exceeding that of any other ion channel gene
expressed by brain pericytes—and to a lesser extent Kir2.2
(Bondjers et al., 2006; He et al., 2018; Vanlandewijck et al.,
2018).
As Kir6.1 is a component of KATP channels, this suggests
that the two key roles of these channels—providing membrane
hyperpolarization and coupling metabolism to membrane
electrical activity—could be major contributors to pericyte
physiology. Functional KATP channels are hetero-octameric
assemblies of four two-transmembrane spanning pore–forming
Kir6.x subunits (either Kir6.1 or Kir6.2, encoded by Kcnj8
and Kcnj11, respectively), each associated with a regulatory
17-transmembrane spanning ATP-binding cassette subfamily
sulfonylurea subunit (SUR1 or SUR2, respectively encoded by
Abcc8 and Abcc9—the latter of which is also highly expressed
in brain pericytes; Figure 5A; Seino and Miki, 2003; Li et al.,
2017). SURs are required for membrane trafficking of the channel
(Burke et al., 2008) and impart sensitivity to KATP agonists and
antagonists and intracellular nucleotides. Alternative splicing
yields a number of SUR2 variants with SUR2A and SUR2B as the
major forms, differing by just 42 amino acids in their C-terminal
domains (Seino and Miki, 2003). Thus, the available expression
data suggest that KATP channels native to brain pericytes are
composed of Kir6.1 and SUR2—often referred to as the “vascular”
form of KATP–and indicates that these are expressed much more
highly in pericytes than they are in cerebral SMCs and ECs
(Figure 4C).
K
+ currents through KATP channels are weakly rectifying
at potentials very positive to EK–the result of voltagedependent intracellular magnesium (Mg2+) block (Findlay,
1987). The defining biophysical feature of KATP channels
is that open probability (Po) decreases with increasing
Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 11 December 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 601324
Hariharan et al. CNS Pericyte Ion Channels and GPCRs
BOX 1 | Potential gap junction congurations between capillary pericytes
and cECs.
According to expression data (He et al., 2018; Vanlandewijck et al., 2018),
pericytes predominantly express mRNA for connexin (Cx)37 and Cx45,
along with much lower expression of Cx26 and Cx43. Capillary ECs, on
the other hand, robustly express Cx43 and Cx45, with low levels of Cx37,
whereas Cx26 is undetectable (see Figure). Electron microscopy has been
used to visualize putative GJ sites between pericytes and ECs at pegsocket interdigitations. In contrast, similar sites between the processes of
neighboring pericytes have yet to be clearly demonstrated. Nonetheless, a
recent dye transfer study (Kovacs-Oller et al., 2020), has shown that the
cells of the capillary bed form a syncytium. Accordingly, two configurations
for cell-cell communication can be postulated: (i) Pericyte-EC GJs alone
permit bidirectional transfer of intracellular materials and charge between
cells of the capillary wall; (ii) both pericyte-EC GJs and pericyte-pericyte GJs
permit intercellular communication along two parallel, closely adjacent paths.
The latter configuration would provide redundancy in the event of cell-cell
communication failing in one cell type.
GJs are homo- or hetero-dodecameric assemblies of Cx subunits (Koval
et al., 2014), formed from two hexameric hemichannels that dock to yield
intercellular channels. GJs can be homotypic, with both hemichannels
composed of the same Cx isoform(s), or heterotypic, with each hemichannel
consisting of a distinct assembly of 6 Cx subunits. Moreover, a given
hemichannel may be homomeric (composed Cx monomers of the same
isoform) or heteromeric (consisting of multiple Cx isoforms), a property that
depends on the propensity of the locally expressed Cxs to co-assemble.
These complexities yield channels with distinct attributes, which may further
oligomerize into large GJ plaques with discrete population characteristics.
Considering pericyte connexins in isolation, α-class Cxs 37 and 45 are not
known to assemble into heteromers, but both of these will heteromerize with
the much more modestly expressed α Cx43. The β Cx26, on the other hand,
is not compatible with α Cx isoforms. Thus, the available data suggest that
the typical pericyte hemichannel is most likely to be a homomeric assembly
of Cx37 or Cx45, with perhaps a low level of heteromerization involving Cx43.
Similarly, the EC-expressed Cx43 will form heteromers with Cx37 and Cx45,
but again the latter are not compatible with one another. Thus, the possibility
of heteromerization appears to be higher for ECs. In terms of heterotypic
compatibility in the formation of GJs, Cx37, Cx43, and Cx45 are known to
readily assemble together, whereas Cx26 hemichannels will not dock with
any of these.
Taken together, this complexity underscores the great deal of further work
needed to firmly establish the nature and properties of GJs in the capillary wall.
intracellular ATP levels, with ATP stabilizing the closed state
of the channel (Enkvetchakul and Nichols, 2003). Thus,
when cellular ATP demands are low and free cytosolic
ATP is high, the channel is closed. In contrast, when
cell activity increases or metabolism drops, the ADP:ATP
ratio rises and the channel may open to hyperpolarize
the membrane (Quayle et al., 1997). Consistent with
these channels being saturated by ATP to keep them
closed under resting conditions, the KATP channel blocker
glibenclamide has no effects on resting CBF but levcromakalim,
a KATP channel opener, increases global CBF by 14%
(Al-Karagholi et al., 2020).
Nucleotide regulation of KATP channels is complex and has
been best characterized for Kir6.2/SUR1-containing channels,
which we review briefly here. Intracellular nucleotides are sensed
by an array of sites throughout the channel complex: ATP
has been shown to bind to an inhibitory site of the Kir6.2
subunit (Tucker et al., 1997; Tanabe et al., 2000) with just one
of four subunits of the channel needing to bind ATP to effect
closure (Markworth et al., 2000). The SUR1 subunit has two
nucleotide binding domains (Li et al., 2017), where Mg2+-bound
adenosine diphosphate (MgADP) occupancy increases channel
activity (Tung and Kurachi, 1991; Gribble et al., 1997; Shyng
et al., 1997). MgATP also has a stimulatory effect here, likely
through hydrolysis to MgADP, although this is normally masked
by the much more potent inhibitory effect of free ATP (Gribble
et al., 1998; Proks et al., 2010). Thus, as might be expected,
increasing intracellular Mg2+ antagonizes the inhibitory effect
of free ATP (Gribble et al., 1998). Conversely, in the absence
of Mg2+, ADP may have an inhibitory effect (Findlay, 1988).
Comparatively less is known about the fine details of nucleotide
regulation of Kir6.1/SUR2B channels, which have a smaller
conductance than their Kir6.2-containing counterparts (∼15–30
pS for Kir6.1/SUR2B-containing channels vs. ∼50–90 pS for the
Kir6.2/SUR2A form, for example; Hibino et al., 2010). However,
it is clear that the presence of a nucleotide diphosphate and Mg2+
is a requirement for channel activity, and that these channels are
also sensitive to ATP inhibition (Kajioka et al., 1991; Kovacs and
Nelson, 1991; Beech et al., 1993; Kamouchi and Kitamura, 1994;
Nelson and Quayle, 1995; Zhang and Bolton, 1996; Yamada et al.,
1997).
One of the consequences of the nucleotide sensitivity of KATP
channels is that they may act as sensors of the metabolic state of
the cell and transduce changes in this parameter into adjustments
of membrane voltage. This is perhaps best characterized in
pancreatic β cells, where KATP channels composed of Kir6.2
and SUR1 subunits couple glucose concentration with insulin
secretion (Tarasov et al., 2004). Here, elevated glucose leads
to an increase in intracellular ATP due to increased glucose
metabolism. This closes KATP channels, which depolarizes the
cell and drives Ca2+-mediated insulin secretion through the
activation of L-type voltage-dependent Ca2+ channels (VDCCs;
MacDonald et al., 2005). Conversely, if glucose concentrations
decrease the channel opens, hyperpolarizing the membrane to
Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 12 December 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 60132
Hariharan et al. CNS Pericyte Ion Channels and GPCRs
FIGURE 4 | Overview of CNS pericyte ion channel and GPCR expression. (A) Relative abundance of mRNA for all ion channel subunits meeting our inclusion criteria.
The size of each segment represents the relative expression of the underlying gene. Channels are clustered on the basis of the ion species that the corresponding
(Continued)
Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 13 December 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 601324
Hariharan et al. CNS Pericyte Ion Channels and GPCRs
FIGURE 4 | functional channel conducts (denoted by shading of the same color) and are then grouped by family/subfamily. K+ channels are the predominant ion
channel class due to extremely high expression of Kcnj8 which forms the pore of vascular KATP channels. The non-selective TRP channels are the next highest
expressed, followed by Ca2+ channels, Cl− channels, and lower expression of other channels. (B) Relative expression of pericyte GPCRs. Here, receptors are
organized by ligand sensitivity or class. (C) Expression of the KATP channel genes Kcnj8 and Abcc9 throughout the brain vasculature. Pericytes express both genes at
much higher levels than arterial SMCs or ECs. However, venous SMCs also express high levels of KATP channel-forming genes.
prevent insulin release. In an analogous situation, KATP channels
composed of Kir6.2 and SUR1 are involved in glucose sensing and
glucagon secretion in the ventromedial hypothalamic neurons of
the hypothalamus (Miki et al., 2001).
Like many other channels (Hille et al., 2015; Dickson
and Hille, 2019), KATP channels containing Kir6.2 poreforming subunits are also influenced by the concentration
of intracellular phosphoinositides, such as phosphoinositol4,5-bisphosphate (PIP2; Fan and Makielski, 1997). In Kir6.2-
containing channels, ATP and PIP2 compete for residues on
overlapping binding sites on the pore forming subunit, each
subtly altering channel conformation to stabilize closed or
open states, respectively (Enkvetchakul and Nichols, 2003),
with PIP2 additionally uncoupling the pore-forming subunit
from its SUR companion (Li et al., 2017). Exposure of these
KATP channels to PIP2 decreases ATP affinity (K0.5) in excess
of two orders of magnitude from ∼10µM to ∼3.5 mM, and
furthermore in the absence of ATP increases channel Po (Shyng
and Nichols, 1998). As the abundance of PIP2 thus regulates
Po, this raises the possibility that cell signaling that impinges
upon PIP2 levels may subsequently affect channel activity.
Kir6.1/SUR2B channels, in contrast, appear to have a much
higher affinity for PIP2 than Kir6.2 channels. Accordingly, PIP2
is thought to bind so tightly here as to be saturating, and
thus physiological fluctuations of this phospholipid do not
influence channel activity (Quinn et al., 2003; Harraz et al.,
2020). However, a number of intracellular signaling pathways
have been established to dramatically influence vascular KATP
activity. Indeed, phosphorylation by protein kinase C (PKC),
lying downstream of DAG, decreases the Po of Kir6.1/SUR2B
channels (Bonev and Nelson, 1996; Shi et al., 2008b) and in
stark contrast, protein kinase A (PKA), which is stimulated as
a result of Gs-coupled GPCR engagement, phosphorylates KATP
to increase Po (Kleppisch and Nelson, 1995; Bonev and Nelson,
1996; Quinn et al., 2004; Shi et al., 2007, 2008a).
Accordingly, there appear to be two major possible avenues
through which vascular KATP channels could be engaged
in pericytes:
i) Changes in metabolism may couple KATP channel activity to
membrane hyperpolarization.
It is possible that brain pericyte KATP channels act as sensors of
the metabolic state of the cell and adjust membrane potential
in response to perturbations in energy supply. Notably, the
expression of the glucose transporter GLUT1 is incredibly
high in astrocytes and brain ECs compared to pericytes,
which express much lower levels of GLUTs 1, 3 and 4 (He
et al., 2018; Vanlandewijck et al., 2018). Therefore, while
astrocytes and capillary endothelial cells are well equipped
for glucose import, the comparatively lower expression of
GLUTs in the pericytes situated between them could make
them more sensitive to subtle changes in glucose levels, such
as local depletions that occur during neural activity (Hu
and Wilson, 1997; Paulson et al., 2010; Li and Freeman,
2015; Pearson-Leary and McNay, 2016). Such decreases in
glucose could impact pericyte metabolism, increasing the
ADP:ATP ratio to open KATP channels and hyperpolarize
the membrane.
However, as glucose can be transmitted via gap junctions
(Rouach et al., 2008) it is possible that pericyte glucose
needs are instead satisfied directly by the underlying ECs,
enabling them to continually maintain a high level of
cytosolic ATP. This latter possibility, coupled with evidence
that metabolic regulation of vascular KATP channels in
arteriolar SMCs requires either anoxia or extreme ATP
consumption (Quayle et al., 2006)—circumstances of
energetic compromise that are unlikely to be seen under
physiological conditions (Quayle et al., 1997)—suggests
that KATP metabolism-electrical coupling may be primarily
relevant in pathological situations (e.g., stroke). In this context,
metabo-electrical coupling may represent a last-ditch effort to
stimulate blood flow and therefore replenish O2 and glucose to
regions in deep metabolic crisis. Further studies are needed to
understand metabolic contributions to the control of pericyte
KATP channels.
ii) Molecules that stimulate Gs signaling may engage pericyte
KATP channels.
Pericytes express a broad repertoire of receptors that couple
to the Gs signaling pathway, including those for purines,
polyadenylate cyclase activating peptide (PACAP), parathyroid
hormone (PTH) and prostaglandins (discussed in detail
below, see Table 2). The release of these molecules into
the paravascular space during neuronal activity could thus
engage Gs signaling in local pericytes, culminating in the
phosphorylation of KATP and channel opening. Indeed, in
the retina (often used as a model of the NVU; see Box 2)
the inhibitory neurotransmitter and metabolic byproduct
adenosine hyperpolarizes the rat retinal pericyte membrane
potential by ∼30 mV through KATP channel engagement
resulting from A1 and A2a adenosine receptor activation
(Li and Puro, 2001), likely through engagement of cAMP
and PKA.
What would be the physiological consequence of such
profound membrane hyperpolarization in pericytes? It has been
proposed that KATP-generated hyperpolarization of pericytes
in the retinal vasculature could be transmitted over long
distances to close VDCCs in the mural cells of upstream
vessels, thereby causing vasorelaxation and an increase in
blood flow (Ishizaki et al., 2009). Such a mechanism could
Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 14 December 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 601324
Hariharan et al. CNS Pericyte Ion Channels and GPCRs
FIGURE 5 | Structural topology of K+ channels expressed by pericytes. (A) Vascular KATP channels are octamers consisting of four 17-transmembrane SUR2
subunits associated with four 2-transmembrane pore-forming Kir6.1 subunits. (B) Kir2.2 channels consist of homo or heteromeric assemblies of four
2-transmembrane subunits. (C) Kv channels are composed of four 6-transmembrane alpha subunits with a positively charged voltage sensor at S4 which transduces
changes in Vm into conformational alterations. (D) K2P channels are tetramers of two-pore domain four-transmembrane subunits. (E) KNa channels have a
6-transmembrane structure that lacks a voltage sensor, with multiple regulatory sites in the long intracellular COOH-terminus including two RCK domains, an ATP
binding site, and a PDZ domain. (F) KCa2.3 channels consist of four 6-transmembrane domains which lack a voltage-sensor at S4. The COOH-terminus of each is
associated with a calmodulin monomer, which imparts Ca2+ sensitivity to the channel.
Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 15 December 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 601324
Hariharan et al. CNS Pericyte Ion Channels and GPCRs
BOX 2 | A brief comparison of retinal and brain vasculatures.
The retinal vasculature consists of two vascular beds—the outer layer of retinal photoreceptors is nourished by the choroidal vasculature, and the multilayered inner
retinal vasculature provides oxygen and nutrients to the inner cell layers. The latter has a tightly regulated blood-retinal barrier, akin to the BBB, which pericytes
help to maintain (Trost et al., 2016). Vascular density in the cerebral cortex varies according to the metabolic demand of the brain region it supplies (e.g., white vs.
gray matter), whereas in the retina, capillary density tends to be greater in the center of the tissue and decreases toward the periphery (Patton et al., 2005). Both
retinal and cerebral vascular cells have identical embryological origins: pericytes and SMCs derive from neuroectodermal neural crest cells and ECs derive from
mesodermal hemangioblasts (Kurz, 2009; Dyer and Patterson, 2010). Structurally, the cortical and inner retinal vascular beds share a similar overall architecture,
with a post-arteriolar transitional zone of 3–4 branches that are covered by contractile mural cells, leading to thin strand pericyte-covered deep capillaries (Ratelade
et al., 2020). A distinction between these vascular beds is that the retinal vasculature is highly organized into two parallel plexi (Ramos et al., 2013), whereas cerebral
capillaries form more elaborate three-dimensional geometries (Blinder et al., 2013). These structural differences could dictate differences in the flow of blood through
each circulation and may necessitate distinctions in the signaling mechanisms that are utilized to direct blood flow through either bed. However, the vasculatures in
both retina and cortex respond similarly to neuronal activity with elevations in blood flow (Newman, 2013), and similar mechanisms underpinning these responses
appear to be at play in either bed. K+, PGE2, and EETs, for example, have been implicated in control of blood flow in both circulations (Newman, 2013; Longden
et al., 2017; Gonzales et al., 2020). Recent studies have also indicated the utility of non-invasive examinations of the retinal vasculature as a marker for detecting
cerebrovascular diseases, due to a similar susceptibility of both circulations to vascular risk factors such as hypertension or diabetes (Patton et al., 2005; van de
Kreeke et al., 2018; McGrory et al., 2019; Querques et al., 2019). Data on gene expression in vascular cells of the retina are currently lacking, but would provide a
useful standpoint for deeper comparisons of the similarities and differences between these vascular beds.
Studies on retinal pericytes (Li and Puro, 2001; Kawamura et al., 2002, 2003; Wu et al., 2003; Matsushita and Puro, 2006), on cerebral pericytes (Peppiatt et al.,
2006; Fernández-Klett et al., 2010; Hill et al., 2015; Rungta et al., 2018), or both (Gonzales et al., 2020; Kovacs-Oller et al., 2020) have thus informed our current
understanding of blood flow control and pericyte physiology. Although it is clear that a high degree of similarity exists between these vascular beds, the possibility of
yet-to-be-identified differences between these networks should be borne in mind when attempting to draw generalizations from data from both vascular beds. To
this end, we note explicitly where data on pericytes in this review were drawn from studies performed in retina.
be enabled by transmission of hyperpolarizing signals either
between pericytes themselves, or between pericytes and ECs.
Indeed, hyperpolarizations transmitted to cECs are predicted
to engage Kir2.1 channels, which we have recently shown to
rapidly propagate hyperpolarizing signals over long distances
through the brain endothelium to upstream arterioles, causing
their dilation and an increase in blood flow (Longden and Nelson,
2015; Longden et al., 2017). A similar mechanism involving both
KATP and Kir2.1 channels has also recently been shown to be
critical for control of blood flow in the heart (Zhao et al., 2020).
In the brain, connexin (Cx)37, and Cx45 are highly expressed
in pericytes (He et al., 2018; Vanlandewijck et al., 2018; see
Box 1), and thus these likely form cell-cell GJs that facilitate
long-range transmission of KATP-mediated electrical signals
(Figure 6).
Kir2 channels are activated not only by membrane
hyperpolarization, but also by external K+, which is an important
mediator of NVC (Filosa et al., 2006; Longden and Nelson, 2015;
Longden et al., 2017). Neurons or astrocytes release K+ into
the perivascular space during NVC, and its concentration can
reach ∼10 mM during concerted activity (Orkand et al., 1966;
Newman, 1986; Ballanyi et al., 1996; Kofuji and Newman, 2004).
Interestingly, Kir2.2 channels are expressed in pericytes (Table 1
and Figure 5B) and Kir currents with the expected biophysical
characteristics and sensitivity to micromolar barium (Ba2+)
have been reported in cultured retinal and heart pericytes (von
Beckerath et al., 2000; Quignard et al., 2003), and retinal and
kidney pericytes from microvessels (Cao et al., 2006; Matsushita
and Puro, 2006). Strong rectification in Kir2 channels results
from intracellular polyamine and Mg2+ block of the channel
pore at depolarized membrane potentials, limiting outward
current. This block is relieved by elevating external K+ to levels
that are typically seen during neuronal activity, initiating rapid
and self-perpetuating hyperpolarization that drives Vm toward
EK (Longden and Nelson, 2015). Thus, pericyte Kir2.2 channels
could contribute to transmitted hyperpolarizations in several
ways. On one hand, K+ elevations resulting from neural activity
may directly activate Kir2.2 channels on pericytes (Figure 6).
Alternatively, engagement of pericyte KATP channels could
cause a K+ or hyperpolarization-mediated recruitment of Kir2.2
channels, which would serve to amplify hyperpolarization.
Kir2.2 channels could then propagate hyperpolarizing signals
from capillary pericytes to upstream vessels by means of
pericyte-pericyte communication through their thin-strand
processes or by passing hyperpolarization to neighboring ECs
via pericyte-endothelial GJs. PIP2 is also central to Kir2 channel
function (D’Avanzo et al., 2010; Hansen et al., 2011), and its
depletion via GqPCR signaling has recently been shown to
play an important role in regulating Kir2.1 channel activity in
cECs (Harraz et al., 2018). Accordingly, signaling processes that
influence PIP2 levels are anticipated to factor in to Kir2.2 channel
activity in pericytes.
Collectively, genetic and functional data to date argue for an
important role of KATP and Kir2.2 channels in regulating pericyte
electrical activity, and we thus propose that the activity of these
channels plays a central role in the control of capillary blood flow
(Figure 6).
Voltage-Gated K+ (Kv) Channels Provide
Graded Opposition to Membrane
Depolarization
Kv channels are formed by 4 identical subunits that surround a
central pore. Each subunit is composed of six transmembrane
segments (S1–S6) of which four form the voltage sensor domain
(S1–S4) with several regularly spaced positively-charged amino
acids in the S4 helix playing a central role in transducing
voltage into conformational changes that gate the channel. The
Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 16 December 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 601324
Hariharan et al. CNS Pericyte Ion Channels and GPCRs
FIGURE 6 | Predicted capillary pericyte-EC interactions to control local blood flow. Neuronal activity drives the release of K+ and GsPCR agonists. Top inset: These
are predicted to engage pericyte Kir2.2 and their cognate GPCRs, respectively. GsPCR activity activates KATP channels, the hyperpolarization by which may feed
forward to evoke further Kir2.2 activity (a sufficient fall in ATP:ADP would also engage KATP channels). The hyperpolarization generated by these channels may then be
passed via gap junctions to cECs (bottom right inset) or possibly to adjacent pericytes, though direct pericyte-pericyte gap junctions have not been observed to date.
In cECs, the incoming hyperpolarization will engage Kir2.1 channels to amplify hyperpolarization to a sufficient level to pass to adjacent cECs and pericytes.
Hyperpolarization-mediated activation of Kir2.1 and Kir2.2 in these cells will rapidly regenerate the current so that it can be passed to the next cell, and so on
upstream to the arteriole. Upon arrival at the arteriole and its first few offshoots, hyperpolarization will be passed via GJs at MEPs to SMCs and to contractile mural
cells, which will close VDCCs, leading to a fall in intracellular Ca2+, relaxation of their actin-myosin contractile machinery, vasodilation, and an increase in blood flow.
remaining two transmembrane regions line the K+-selective pore
(S5–S6; Figure 5C; Jiang et al., 2003; Chen et al., 2010).
In order of mRNA abundance, cerebral pericytes express
modest to low levels of genes encoding: Kv6.1, Kv7.4, Kv2.1,
Kv9.3, Kv9.1, Kv7.5, and Kv1.2, in the absence of Kv beta subunits
(Table 1). Outward K+ currents attributable to Kv channels
have been measured in these cells, for example in guinea pig
cochlear stria vascularis and cultured bovine retinal pericytes
(von Beckerath et al., 2000; Quignard et al., 2003; Liu et al.,
2018). Kv channels are crucial for negative feedback regulation
of Vm, their Po and unitary currents increasing with membrane
depolarization to provide a counterbalancing hyperpolarizing
influence (Nelson and Quayle, 1995; Koide et al., 2018). Their
activity can also be modulated by a range of intracellular
signaling cascades that engage varied effectors such as PKC, cSRC or Rho-kinase (which inhibit Kv channels) or cAMP-PKA
and cyclic guanosine monophosphate(cGMP)-protein kinase G
(PKG) signaling pathways (which promote channel activity)
(Jackson, 2018). Of note, nitric oxide (NO) can exert major
signaling effects via soluble guanylate cyclase (sGC) and cGMPPKG in pericytes (Denninger and Marletta, 1999). As adjacent
cECs are a major source of local NO (Longden et al., 2019), its
Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 17 December 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 601324
Hariharan et al. CNS Pericyte Ion Channels and GPCRs
elevation may be sufficient to engage pericyte PKG signaling to
promote activity of KV and other PKG-sensitive channels.
Cerebral arteriolar SMCs are each estimated to express ∼3,000
Kv channels/cell (Dabertrand et al., 2015) composed principally
of Kv1.2 and Kv1.5 (Straub et al., 2009) with activation initially
detectable above −40 mV and increasing e-fold per 11-13 mV,
exhibiting half-activation between approximately −10 and 0 mV
(Robertson and Nelson, 1994; Straub et al., 2009). These
channels also exhibit substantial steady-state inactivation over
the physiological voltage range (Robertson and Nelson, 1994).
Kv currents with similar characteristics have been described in
cultured retinal pericytes (Quignard et al., 2003), whereas the
half-maximal activation of Kv channels recorded in cultured
coronary pericytes is substantially more negative at −40.9 mV,
along with a steeper voltage-dependence of activation (e-fold
per 4.6 mV) and only modest inactivation at physiological
membrane potentials (von Beckerath et al., 2000). Thus, Kv
current characteristics in pericytes appear to be regionally
dependent, likely a result of differential expression and assembly
of distinct Kv isoforms. Direct characterization of Kv currents
in native brain pericytes is therefore critical to furthering our
understanding of their role in the control of pericyte Vm, where
these channels are anticipated to provide negative feedback to
limit depolarization effected by the activity of depolarizing ion
channels in pericytes, such as those of the TRP family.
K2P3.1 Channels Provide a Background K+
Conductance and May Impart pH
Sensitivity
K2P channels contribute to maintenance of resting membrane
potential due to steady outward K+ “leak” at potentials positive
to EK. They comprise a family of 15 members, and are composed
of two identical subunits, each with four transmembrane
domains with two pore-forming loops making up a central K+-
conducting pore (Figure 5D; Miller and Long, 2012; Lolicato
et al., 2014). K2P3.1, also known as the two-pore domain
weakly inwardly-rectifying K+ channel (TWIK)-related acidsensitive K
+ (TASK)-1 channel (Duprat et al., 1997), is the
only K2P isoform expressed in capillary pericytes, and is also
expressed in cerebral SMCs (He et al., 2018; Vanlandewijck et al.,
2018). In SMCs, its steady current contributes to maintaining
a relatively negative Vm by counterbalancing depolarizing
influences (Gurney et al., 2003).
Perhaps the most well-studied characteristic of TASK-1 is
its sensitivity to pH within the range of ∼6.5–8. Acidic pH
inhibits channel activity while alkaline pH increases it, with
half-maximal activation occurring at pH 7.4 and ∼90% of
maximal TASK-1 current recorded at pH 7.7 (Duprat et al., 1997).
Synchronous neuronal activity can cause rapid changes in pH.
For example, alkalization in extracellular pH has been observed
in the hippocampus, cerebellum and some cortical areas, by up
to 0.2 units (Chesler and Kaila, 1992; Makani and Chesler, 2010).
Thus, it is possible that in addition to setting resting Vm, K2P3.1
imparts sensitivity to pericytes in these regions to such shifts,
which could hyperpolarize Vm to modulate blood flow through
the mechanisms described above.
Na+- and Ca2+-Activated K+ Channels Are
Expressed at Low Levels in Pericytes
Capillary pericytes also express low levels of genes encoding the
Na+-activated KNa1.2 channel and the Ca2+-activated KCa2.3
channel (Table 1). KNa1.2 channels (Figure 5E) are sensitive to
intracellular Na+ and Cl−, and are dramatically stimulated by cell
swelling and inhibited by a decrease in cell volume (Bhattacharjee
et al., 2003; Tejada et al., 2014). Thus, they could impart
sensitivity to pericyte volume changes, and may respond to
fluctuations in intracellular ion concentrations or metabolic state.
KCa2.3 (also known as SK3) belongs to the family of smallconductance Ca2+-activated K+ (SK) channels that share overall
transmembrane topology with Kv channels, yet lack a functional
voltage-sensor at S4 (Figure 5F; Adelman et al., 2012). Each
subunit in the tetrameric channel is associated with a calmodulin
(CaM) monomer via a CaM binding domain in the C-terminal
region. Ca2+ binding to CaM induces a conformational change
which leads to rapid channel opening, with an EC50 for Ca2+
of 300–500 nM (Ledoux et al., 2006; Adelman et al., 2012). If
functional SK channels in native pericytes are confirmed, they
are expected to facilitate coupling between Ca2+ elevations and
membrane hyperpolarization.
PERICYTE TRP CHANNELS
The TRP channel family mediates cellular responses to a wide
range of stimuli (Clapham, 2003). These are non-selective cation
channels that depolarize the membrane upon activation and, in
many cases, conduct significant amounts of Ca2+. In mammals
there are six subfamilies of TRP channels encoded by 28 genes, 11
of which are expressed by capillary pericytes. These are canonical
(TRPC1, TRPC3, TRPC4, TRPC6), melastatin (TRPM3, TRPM4,
TRPM7), mucolipin (TRPML1), poly-cystin (TRPP1, TRPP3),
and vanilloid (TRPV2) channels (Earley and Brayden, 2010; He
et al., 2018; Vanlandewijck et al., 2018). Functional TRP channels
are tetramers of subunits with a common six transmembrane
structure, which can assemble into homomeric or heteromeric
functional channels. Their tendency to heteromerize, generally
with closely related members, can give rise to channels
with unique sensing capabilities and biophysical properties
(Venkatachalam and Montell, 2007). Overall, subfamily members
share ∼35% amino acid sequence homology, with the majority
of this diversity arising from differences in their cytoplasmic
domains (Figure 7; Clapham, 2003; Nilius and Owsianik, 2011).
While they have been traditionally described as “non-selective,”
the pattern of ion selectivity for different cations varies between
subfamilies (Hill-Eubanks et al., 2014; see Table 1).
Broadly speaking, TRP channels are major downstream
effectors for GPCR signaling (Clapham, 2003; Veldhuis et al.,
2015), with particular second messenger systems both activating
or sensitizing some TRP channels, and decreasing the activity
of others. TRPC channels are Ca2+ permeable and typically
activated by plasmalemmal GPCRs or tyrosine kinase receptors
that activate PLC isoforms (Albert, 2011). TRPC3/6 channels
are directly activated by DAG, which is liberated by Gq
signaling, and inhibited by PIP2, which decreases during Gq
Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 18 December 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 601324
Hariharan et al. CNS Pericyte Ion Channels and GPCRs
FIGURE 7 | Structural overview of the TRP families expressed in CNS capillary pericytes, adapted with permission from Clapham (2003). All TRP channels share a
common and typical 6-transmembrane structure with profoundly varying intracellular N- and C-terminal domains, the major features of which are illustrated. CC,
coiled-coil domain.
activity (Hofmann et al., 1999; Albert, 2011). The activation
mechanisms of TRPC4 are less clear, whereas TRPC1-containing
channels are unresponsive to DAG and are instead gated by
PIP2 in a PKC-dependent manner (Hofmann et al., 1999;
Albert, 2011), although heteromultimerization with TRPC3 can
convey DAG sensitivity (Lintschinger et al., 2000). TRPC3 is
the most robustly expressed TRP channel in capillary pericytes
(Table 1) and is thus likely to be engaged during GqPCRDAG signaling. This channel permits robust Ca2+ entry,
although it has relatively low selectivity for Ca2+ over Na+
(pCa2+:pNa+ ∼1.5; Pedersen et al., 2005). At the arteriolar
level, TRPC3 has been implicated in mediating vasodilation
through elevations of EC Ca2+ leading to KCa2.3 activation
(Kochukov et al., 2014), whereas its activation in SMCs
mediates arteriolar constriction through a mechanism involving
an IP3R-activated (sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) Ca2+ release
independent) TRPC3-dependent Na+ current that depolarizes
Vm and activates VDCCs (Xi et al., 2009). Similar couplings
may occur in capillary pericytes, likely depending on the
macromolecular organization of TRPC3 with other local
signaling elements.
Members of the TRPC subfamily, in particular TRPC1, have
also been suggested to participate in store-operated Ca2+ entry
(SOCE)—an event activated by the depletion of endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) Ca2+ stores that depends on Orai1 and the
ER-Ca2+ status sensing protein stromal interaction molecule 1
(STIM1; Huang et al., 2006; Soboloff et al., 2006; Cheng et al.,
2008, 2013). Capillary pericytes express STIM1 and Orai1 and 3
(Table 1), and thus a functional interaction between TRPC1 and
these proteins could be important for SOCE in pericytes. Recent
work also shows TRPM7 activation, although not essential, can
positively modulate SOCE (Souza Bomfim et al., 2020).
Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 19 December 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 601324
Hariharan et al. CNS Pericyte Ion Channels and GPCRs
The melastatin channel TRPM4 is unique in its exclusive
permeability to monovalent cations. Na+ currents through
TRPM4 are voltage-dependent and activated by intracellular
Ca2+ (EC50 ∼20µM) with the Ca2+ sensitivity of the channel
regulated by multiple factors including cytosolic ATP, PKCdependent phosphorylation and calmodulin (Nilius et al., 2005;
Ullrich et al., 2005). In cerebral SMCs, membrane stretch
indirectly activates TRPM4 (and TRPC6) current through
angiotensin II AT1 receptor activation and a resultant IP3-
mediated Ca2+ elevation (Gonzales et al., 2014). Pericytes also
express the AT1 receptor, and thus a similar mechanism may
be present in capillary pericytes which could contribute to the
mild, slow constrictions these cells are capable of FernándezKlett et al. (2010). In contrast to the monovalent conductance
of TRPM4, the closely related TRPM3 and TRPM7 channels are
also permeable to Ca2+ and Mg2+ (Pedersen et al., 2005). TRPM3
is activated by cell swelling, the neurosteroid pregnenolone
sulfate, and the metabolite D-erythro-sphingosine and related
sphingosine analogs and thus may impart sensitivity to steroid
and lipid signals to pericytes (Grimm et al., 2005; Wagner
et al., 2008). As pericytes also robustly express the S1P3 receptor
(discussed below), it is likely that TRPM3 and S1P3 respond
in concert to locally released lipids, such as those released
constitutively by ECs and RBCs (Selim et al., 2011; Ksiazek et al.,
2015). TRPM7, in contrast, is ubiquitously expressed and plays a
major role in Mg2+ homeostasis (Schlingmann et al., 2007).
Functional TRPP1 channels (encoded by the Pkd2 gene) have
a large conductance and conduct a significant amount of Ca2+
(Earley and Brayden, 2015). This channel has been implicated in
mechanosensation when expressed alongside polycystic kidney
disease (PKD)1 (Giamarchi and Delmas, 2007; Sharif-Naeini
et al., 2009; Narayanan et al., 2013). As PKD1 is also present
in pericytes, these channels may aid in the detection of local
mechanical forces, such as paravascular fluid shear from the
glymphatic system (Mestre et al., 2018), or those imparted
through the very thin endothelium by changes in blood
flow during neuronal activity, or through subtle changes in
diameter of the underlying capillary. Similarly, the vanilloid
family member TRPV2, also expressed in SMCs throughout
the vasculature (Muraki et al., 2003), has been suggested to
play a role in mechanosensation-evoked Ca2+ entry (PerálvarezMarín et al., 2013). Continuing this theme, mechanosensory
contributions have also been reported for TRPC1, TRPC6, and
TRPM4 (Yin and Kuebler, 2010). Combined with the fact that
pericytes also express Piezo1 (see below), this represents a broad
mechanosensing repertoire, suggesting that pericytes may be
exquisitely sensitive to a range of mechanical perturbations. The
resultant Ca2+ elevation and depolarizing currents through the
activity of these channels could couple to a number of processes,
including driving further Ca2+ release from stores, and activation
of VDCCs, KCa2.3 channels, or Ca2+-activated Cl− channels
(CaCCs; discussed below). As recent work demonstrates that
pericytes can subtly influence tone throughout the capillary
bed (Fernández-Klett et al., 2010), mechanosensing and Ca2+-
mediated mechanisms may play an important role in influencing
this process.
PERICYTE Ca2+ CHANNELS
The overall expression level of Ca2+ channels is similar to that
of TRP channels in pericytes, composed of message for IP3R
subtypes and a range of VDCCs.
IP3Rs Permit a Versatile Range of Ca2+
Signaling Behaviors in Response to
Extracellular Signals
The vast majority of intracellular Ca2+ signals arise from either
Ca2+ influx across the plasmalemma, or release from the SR/ER
via IP3Rs or ryanodine receptors (RyRs). IP3Rs are enormous
proteins (∼1.3 MDa) formed by four IP3R subunits. Three
subunit isoforms—IP3R1-3—exist, which are able to homo- or
heterotetramize. Each individual subunit has six transmembrane
segments: The fifth and sixth segments form a central ionconducting pore that is connected via a linker to the peripheral
bundle formed by transmembrane domains 1-4. The large
cytoplasmic N-terminal domain contains the IP3 binding site and
a putative Ca2+ sensor region, and binding of IP3 and Ca2+ leads
to conformational changes which are transmitted to the pore to
gate the channel (Figure 8; Fan et al., 2015; Baker et al., 2017;
Hamada et al., 2017). IP3R subtypes share ∼70% homology and
differ in their affinity for IP3, with IP3R2 being more sensitive
than IP3R1, and both of these subtypes being more sensitive than
IP3R3 (Tu et al., 2005; Iwai et al., 2007). Brain capillary pericytes
express the genes encoding IP3Rs 1 and 2 robustly, and a much
lower level of IP3R3, whereas RyRs are not appreciably expressed
by these cells (He et al., 2018; Vanlandewijck et al., 2018;
Table 1).
As described briefly above, GqPCRs activating phospholipase
Cβ (PLCβ) (Fisher et al., 2020), or receptor tyrosine kinases
(RTKs) activating PLCγ, can mediate the formation of IP3 and
DAG from PIP2. IP3 then binds to IP3Rs on the ER membrane,
leading to Ca2+ release from the ER lumen (where Ca2+ is
maintained between 100 and 800µM; Burdakov et al., 2005)
down its electrochemical gradient into the cytosol (<100 nM
basal Ca2+; Berridge, 2016). IP3 and Ca2+ act as co-agonists
at IP3Rs (Bezprozvanny et al., 1991; Finch et al., 1991; Foskett
et al., 2007) and channels display a biphasic sensitivity to Ca2+,
resulting in a characteristic bell-shaped concentration-response
curve. In the presence of very low IP3 levels, IP3Rs are extremely
sensitive to Ca2+ inhibition. However, a small increase in IP3
concentration (to ∼100 nM) profoundly reduces the sensitivity of
the channel to Ca2+ inhibition, permitting dramatic increases in
activity (Iino, 1990; Bezprozvanny et al., 1991; Finch et al., 1991;
Foskett et al., 2007).
The resultant release of stored Ca2+ can take on a broad range
of spatiotemporal profiles, which depend on many factors. To
name just a few, these include the concentration of local IP3 and
Ca2+, ER Ca2+ load, the type, and number of IP3Rs expressed,
their splice variation, whether they are homomers or heteromers,
and the topology of the local microenvironment. Such intricacies
provide the versatility to potentially generate a huge variety of
Ca2+ signals that encode information through their amplitudes,
Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 20 December 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 601324
Hariharan et al. CNS Pericyte Ion Channels and GPCRs
FIGURE 8 | Structural topology of Ca2+ channels expressed by pericytes. (A) The general structure of Cav channels consists of a single 24-transmembrane α subunit
which is a repeat of a 6-transmembrane motif with an embedded voltage sensor connected by intracellular loops. This is accompanied by associated β, γ, and α2δ
subunits. (B) IP3Rs consist of a tetrameric assembly of 6- transmembrane subunits with a large N-terminal domain that contains the IP3 binding site.
durations, frequencies, and spatial characteristics (Bootman and
Bultynck, 2020). Despite these inherent complexities, a range of
stereotyped IP3R-mediated Ca2+ signals typically emerge. These
range from the opening of single IP3R (termed a “blip”), to the
coordinated, weakly cooperative openings of a cluster of around
6 IP3Rs within a release site (a “puff ”), to finally—with sufficient
IP3–a long-range regenerative Ca2+ “wave” arising due to the
recruitment of successive sites through the process of Ca2+-
induced Ca2+ release (CICR) (Berridge et al., 2000; Smith and
Parker, 2009; Lock and Parker, 2020).
Store-mediated Ca2+ release has been observed in pericytes
in a range of contexts. For example, pericytes of the ureter
display long-duration IP3R-mediated Ca2+ transients in response
to the GqPCR agonists endothelin-1 and arginine vasopressin.
These signals are suppressed by elevations of Ca2+ in adjacent
cECs, which are suggested to inhibit IP3R activity through a
NO-dependent mechanism (Borysova et al., 2013). Spontaneous
ER Ca2+ release-dependent Ca2+ transients have also been
observed in suburothelial capillary pericytes, which activate
CaCCs to depolarize the membrane, subsequently recruiting
VDCCs (Hashitani et al., 2018).
In the brain, recent studies have revealed that capillary
pericytes generate microdomain Ca2+ oscillations under ambient
conditions, and that neural activity evoked by odor leads to
a transient cessation of these signals and a decrease in basal
Ca2+, which correlates with an increase in RBC velocity (Hill
et al., 2015; Rungta et al., 2018). However, it is worthy of note
that a decrease was not observed in similar experiments in
which whisker stimulation was used to drive activity (Hill et al.,
2015), suggesting the possibility of heterogeneity in the Ca2+
signaling machinery deployed by pericytes in different regions of
the cortex. The specific ion channels and broader mechanisms
that underlie these ambient signals have not yet been delineated,
but IP3Rs are obvious potential candidates. Elucidation of the
mechanistic basis and roles of these Ca2+ signals in brain
capillaries is critical, and awaits further experimentation.
Voltage-Dependent Ca2+ Channels Directly
Link Vm to Ca2+ Entry
VDCCs are composed of four to five distinct subunits (α1,
β, α2δ, and γ; Figure 7). The α1 subunits are pore forming
and responsible for the pharmacological diversity of different
VDCC subtypes. These are associated with an intracellular β
subunit, a disulphide-linked α2δ subunit, and in some cases
a transmembrane γ subunit, each of which regulate surface
Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 21 December 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 601324
Hariharan et al. CNS Pericyte Ion Channels and GPCRs
expression and tune the biophysical properties of the channel
(Catterall et al., 2005). The large α1 subunit is organized into
four homologous domains, each comprising six transmembrane
segments (S1-S6) with intracellular N- and C- termini. Similar to
Kv channels, the S4 segment of each of these domains comprises
the voltage sensor and the S5-S6 regions form the ion conducting
pore (Catterall et al., 2005). Capillary pericytes express genes
encoding the α subunits for L-type (Cav1.2, Cav1.3), P/Q-type
(Cav2.1), and T-type (Cav3.1, Cav3.2) channels and thus we
briefly review the salient properties of these here. They also
express low levels of several genes encoding β and α2δ auxiliary
subunits (He et al., 2018; Vanlandewijck et al., 2018).
As with Kv channels, VDCC activity depends on membrane
potential: Po steeply increases with depolarization, balanced by
multiple feedback mechanisms that act to limit Ca2+ entry at
depolarized potentials. Prominent among these are voltage- and
Ca2+-dependent inactivation. Voltage-dependent inactivation
(VDI) is inherent to the α1 subunit but is modulated by
the ancillary β subunit and others, whereas Ca2+-dependent
inactivation (CDI) is conferred by a CaM monomer associated
with the α1 carboxy tail (Peterson et al., 1999; An and Zamponi,
2005; Dick et al., 2008; Tadross and Yue, 2010; Tadross et al.,
2010). Regulation is additionally complicated by the panoply of
alternative splice variants that can be expressed, which impact
the biophysical properties of the functional channel, including
sensitivity to CDI and VDI.
L-type channels are widely expressed, including in the heart,
in skeletal and smooth muscle, and in neurons (Zamponi
et al., 2015). Cav1.2 and Cav1.3 have distinct biophysical and
pharmacological differences (Lipscombe et al., 2004)—Cav1.3
channels open and close on faster timescales than Cav1.2
(Helton et al., 2005), and are less sensitive to inhibition by
dihydropyridines (Xu and Lipscombe, 2001). A C-terminal
modulatory (CTM) domain can structurally interfere with CaM
binding to decrease Po and reduce CDI, an effect that is more
pronounced in Cav1.3 than Cav1.2 (Striessnig et al., 2014).
Moreover, in alternatively spliced Cav1.3 channels, the absence of
a CTM domain can shift the voltage of half-maximal activation by
∼+10 mV by decreasing the slope factor of the activation curve
without any effects on activation threshold (Singh et al., 2008). At
physiological extracellular Ca2+ levels, the activation threshold
of Cav1.3 is much more negative (-55 mV) than Cav1.2 (-25 to
−30 mV) (Xu and Lipscombe, 2001). Thus, at pericyte resting Vm
of around −45 mV, as measured in the retina (Zhang et al., 2011),
Cav1.3 channels could be active and contribute to Ca2+ entry.
In addition to voltage- and Ca2+-dependent inhibition, Ltype VDCC activity is heavily regulated by GPCR signaling.
Prominent among these, Gs-cAMP-PKA signaling has long
been known to play an important role in stimulating channel
activity, and has been studied extensively in the heart. Here, it
was recently shown that the target of PKA phosphorylation is
not the core channel itself, as mutation of all PKA consensus
phosphorylation sites to alanine resulted in channels that
retained PKA regulation. Rather, PKA acts via the small G protein
Rad, a constitutive inhibitor of VDCCs. Phosphorylation of
Rad relieves its interaction with β subunits, and allows channel
activity (Liu et al., 2020). Further regulation of L-type channels by
PKC, stimulated by DAG liberated as a result of GqPCR activity,
is also a possibility, with both inhibitory and potentiating effects
having been observed (Kamp and Hell, 2000).
P- and Q-type currents are both attributable to Cav2.1, with
the β subunit accompanying the pore-forming subunit thought
to account for their differences (Zamponi et al., 2015). These
channels have been best characterized in the nerve terminals
and dendrites of neurons where they couple Ca2+ entry with
neurotransmitter release (Zamponi et al., 2015) and also play a
role in coupling Ca2+ entry to gene transcription via engagement
of CaM kinase II (Wheeler et al., 2012). They open in response
to similar depolarization levels as Cav1.2 channels, with an
activation threshold of approximately −40 mV (Adams et al.,
2009). Upon repetitive/tetanic stimulation, as occurs during
neuronal activity, CaM can bind to two adjacent sites on
the Cav2.1 α1 subunit to mediate an initial Ca2+-dependent
facilitation (CDF) of P/Q-type current, followed by progressive
CDI, with a relatively slow (30 s−1 min) recovery from this
(Lee et al., 1999, 2000). While CDI of Cav2.1 requires a global
Ca2+ increase, CDF can be promoted by Ca2+ entry through
an individual Cav2.1 channel and results in an enhancement of
channel Po, enabling stimulation-evoked increases in amplitude
and duration of Ca2+ currents (Chaudhuri et al., 2007). Slow
and fast modes of Cav2.1 gating have been proposed. The
slow mode exhibits longer mean closed times and latency to
first opening, slower kinetics of inactivation, and necessitates
larger depolarizations to open the channel. Inactivation also
occurs at more depolarized potentials in the slow compared
to fast mode (Luvisetto et al., 2004). The type of β subunit
modulates the prevalence of these modes, with fast and slow
gating mediated by β3a and β4a subunits, respectively (Luvisetto
et al., 2004), the latter of which is expressed more robustly by
brain pericytes (He et al., 2018; Vanlandewijck et al., 2018).
Cav2.1 channels are inhibited by GPCR activity through several
distinct mechanisms—direct binding of the G protein βγ dimer
can augment VDI, while voltage-independent mechanisms such
as phosphorylation, depletion of essential lipids, and trafficking
mechanisms also play important roles (Zamponi and Currie,
2013).
T-type (Cav3.1 and Cav3.2) channels are activated at more
negative potentials, around −60 mV, with rapid gating kinetics
and small single channel amplitudes (Iftinca and Zamponi, 2009;
Rossier, 2016). At membrane potentials of −65 to −55 mV, these
channels exhibit window currents in which the channels open
but do not inactivate completely, permitting ongoing Ca2+ entry
(Perez-Reyes, 2003). These channels can be modulated by the
activity of a broad range of GPCRs, including those with Gα
subunits that couple to PKA, PKC, and PKG, along with direct
effects of Gβγ subunits (Iftinca and Zamponi, 2009).
Both L- and T-type VDCCs are expressed in cerebral SMCs
(Hill-Eubanks et al., 2011; Harraz and Welsh, 2013; Harraz
et al., 2014). Here, L-type channels provide Ca2+ for contraction
(Nelson et al., 1990), whereas T-type channels provide negative
feedback by coupling Ca2+ entry to RyR activity. Subsequent
Ca2+ release via RyRs in turn activates large-conductance Ca2+-
activated K+ (BK) channels to hyperpolarize the membrane
(Harraz and Welsh, 2013; Harraz et al., 2014). T- and P/Q-type
Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 22 December 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 601324
Hariharan et al. CNS Pericyte Ion Channels and GPCRs
channel currents have not yet been observed in native pericytes,
but L-type VDCC currents have been measured in the retina
(Sakagami et al., 1999). Variance in the magnitude of L-type
VDCC Ca2+ currents across the microvascular network has
functional consequences for the degree of Ca2+ entry via these
channels (Matsushita et al., 2010; Burdyga and Borysova, 2014).
In the retina, L-type VDCC currents are 7.5-fold higher in
SMCs as compared to capillary pericytes, suggesting that Vm
changes influence intracellular Ca2+ levels to a greater degree
at the level of arterioles (Matsushita et al., 2010). Indeed,
extracellular K+ at 10 mM (a concentration that evokes Kirmediated hyperpolarization) and 97.5 mM (which depolarizes
the membrane to drive VDCC activity) significantly decreased
and increased intracellular Ca2+ in arteriolar SMCs, respectively,
but had only a marginal effect on capillary pericyte Ca2+
(Matsushita et al., 2010). Thorough characterization of native
brain capillary pericyte VDCC currents and their densities is
needed to advance our understanding of the contribution of these
channels to pericyte Ca2+ handling.
PERICYTE Cl− CHANNELS
Cl− channels are found in the plasma membrane and that
of intracellular organelles and have been implicated in the
regulation of cell excitability and volume, acidification of
intracellular organelles, control of muscle tone, and synaptic
transmission (Jentsch et al., 1999; Nilius and Droogmans, 2003).
While they are permeable to other anions (such as iodide,
bromide, or nitrate), they are referred to as Cl− channels since
this is the most abundant permeating anion species (Jentsch
et al., 2002). Capillary pericytes express the CaCC formerly
known as TMEM16A or anoctamin (Ano)1, and several members
of the voltage-dependent chloride channel (ClC) family—ClC2,−3,−4,−6, and−7 (He et al., 2018; Vanlandewijck et al., 2018).
The latter four of these are Cl−/H+ antiporters and are not
considered further here. Capillary pericytes also express other
anoctamins that have been implicated in lipid scrambling: Ano4
and Ano6, as well as the poorly understood Ano10 (He et al.,
2018; Vanlandewijck et al., 2018). Reports indicate that Ano6
may act as a Ca2+-activated Cl− and non-selective cation channel
with scramblase activity (Suzuki et al., 2010; Yang et al., 2012;
Grubb et al., 2013) and Ano4 was recently shown to be a Ca2+-
dependent non-specific cation channel with similar scrambling
capabilities (Reichhart et al., 2019).
CaCC Channels Couple Intracellular Ca2+
Increases to Depolarizing Cl− Efflux
The CaCC TMEM16A is a homodimer of two pores and ten
transmembrane domains, cytosolic N- and C-termini, and an
extracellular domain (Dang et al., 2017; Paulino et al., 2017).
Ca2+ binding to a transmembrane region of the pore induces
a conformational rearrangement that gates the channel and
leads to Cl− permeation, generating a current that is outwardly
rectifying with a slope conductance of ∼8 pS (Yang et al., 2008;
Xiao et al., 2011; Paulino et al., 2017). Ca2+ and voltage gating are
closely coupled, with a stretch of 8 amino acids controlling both
Ca2+ sensitivity and voltage-dependence of the channel (Xiao
et al., 2011). Indeed, a remarkable feature of this channel is the
voltage-dependence of Ca2+ sensitivity, with an EC50 of 2.6µM
at −60 mV and 400 nM at +60 mV. At physiological voltages,
the channel is maximally activated by around 10µM intracellular
Ca2+ but concentrations exceeding this lower activation. Strong
depolarization (above ∼100 mV), in contrast, opens the channel
even in the absence of Ca2+, despite the lack of a classic voltage
sensor in the CaCC structure (Yang et al., 2008; Xiao et al., 2011).
The kinetics of activation are slow at positive potentials, but are
sharpened by an elevation of Ca2+, and at negative potentials
channels display deactivation (Nilius and Droogmans, 2003).
This interplay between Vm and intracellular Ca2+ makes the
CaCC an attractive candidate for regulation of Vm in response
to elevations intracellular Ca2+.
Since CaCC is sensitive to micromolar-range intracellular
Ca2+ at typical resting potentials, it seems plausible that it
is stimulated by local Ca2+ elevations (as opposed to global
increases) such as those occurring through nearby TRPs, VDCCs,
Orai channels, or IP3Rs. In keeping with this notion, cerebral
SMC CaCCs are activated by TRPC6-mediated Ca2+ entry
which drives vasoconstriction (Wang et al., 2016). Coupling
of IP3R activity to CaCCs has also been reported in response
to purinergic receptor activation, wherein CaCC-containing
membrane domains are closely localized with ER regions via
a physical linkage between this protein and IP3R1, facilitating
exclusive communication between the two and exposing the
CaCC to high Ca2+ concentrations during its release from the
ER (Jin et al., 2013; Cabrita et al., 2017).
Underscoring their important role in the vasculature, targeted
disruption of CaCCs from contractile vascular SMCs, mural
cells and pericytes lowers systemic blood pressure (Heinze
et al., 2014), whereas conversely CaCC overexpression drives
hypertension (Wang et al., 2015). In vascular SMCs, the driving
force for depolarizing Cl− currents comes from Cl−/HCO3−
exchange and Na+/K+/Cl− cotransport which enable high
intracellular Cl− concentrations (30–50 mM; Owen, 1984;
Chipperfield and Harper, 2000; Kitamura and Yamazaki, 2001).
Capillary pericytes in the brain express mRNA for genes encoding
two of the SLC4 family Cl−/HCO3− exchangers (Slc4a2, Slc4a3)
and the NKCC1 Na+/K+/Cl− cotransporter (Slc12a2) (He et al.,
2018; Vanlandewijck et al., 2018), which raise the potential for
similarly high intracellular Cl− concentrations. ECl with 30–
50 mM intracellular Cl− and 133 mM extracellular Cl− (Longden
et al., 2016) is between approximately −35 and −25 mV—more
positive than resting Vm of pericytes (∼-45 mV, as measured in
the retina; Zhang et al., 2011), therefore under these conditions
activation of CaCC would cause Cl− efflux and membrane
depolarization, as seen in SMCs (Kitamura and Yamazaki, 2001;
Bulley and Jaggar, 2014). While direct evidence for CaCCs
in cortical capillary pericytes is currently lacking, in bladder
pericytes ER Ca2+ release activates CaCCs and the resulting
depolarization propagates to upstream SMCs of pre-capillary
arterioles via gap junctions, where they depolarize the membrane
to activate L-type VDCCs (Hashitani et al., 2018). In the pericytes
of descending vasa recta, angiotensin II causes cytoplasmic Ca
2+
oscillations that activate CaCC channels and depolarize Vm to
Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 23 December 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 601324
Hariharan et al. CNS Pericyte Ion Channels and GPCRs
approximately −30 mV (Zhang et al., 2008; Lin et al., 2010).
CaCC current and membrane depolarization have also been
recorded in retinal pericytes, where CaCC activation depends
on unidentified non-selective cation channels (Sakagami et al.,
1999) and can be evoked by GqPCR stimulation with endothelin
(Kawamura et al., 2002). Thus, CaCCs in brain pericytes are
predicted to depolarize Vm by coupling to a number of potential
Ca2+ sources, including IP3Rs and TRP channels.
ClC Channels May Repolarize the
Membrane Following Electrical Signaling
ClCs are double-barreled homodimeric channels with one ion
conduction pore per monomer (Dutzler et al., 2002). Each
subunit is made up of 18 α-helices which display an interesting
internal anti-parallel architecture, and many of these helices
are shortened and tilted which permits disparate parts of the
polypeptide to come together to form the Cl− selectivity filter
of the pore (Dutzler et al., 2002). The C-terminus also contains
two cystathione-β-synthase domains, which regulate gating by
binding ATP and ADP to decelerate the kinetics of activation
and deactivation (Estévez et al., 2004; Stölting et al., 2013).
ClC-2 has a unitary conductance of 2-3 pS and displays strong
inward rectification. A remarkable biophysical characteristic of
this channel is its slow hyperpolarization-mediated activation at
potentials negative to around−40 mV, giving rise to currents that
are only very slowly inactivating (Nilius and Droogmans, 2003;
Bi et al., 2014). In addition to its hyperpolarization activation,
it is sensitive to changes in cell volume and extracellular pH
and is also activated by PKA (Nilius and Droogmans, 2003; Bi
et al., 2014). As we have suggested previously for hyperpolarizing
electrical signals generated in cECs, ClC-2 is an attractive
candidate for mediating membrane repolarization (Garcia and
Longden, 2020), in that its slow activation kinetics would enable
Kir-mediated electrical signals to be generated and sent upstream
before ClC-2 mediated Cl− current fully develops to repolarize
the membrane. Accordingly, ClC-2 may fulfill a similar role in
pericytes to initiate membrane repolarization in the wake of
electrical signals generated by KATP and Kir channels.
FURTHER CHANNELS IN PERICYTES
Capillary pericytes express an array of other ion channels,
including the ubiquitous two-pore channels (TPCs), voltagegated Na+ (Nav) channels, P2X receptors, and acid-sensing ion
channels (ASICs; Table 1 and Figure 4). Due to their lower
expression and dearth of functional data in capillary pericytes,
detailed discussion of these channels is beyond the scope of this
review, although we touch briefly upon the function of Piezo1
channels and P2X receptors.
P2X Receptors
The ubiquitous purine ATP has received attention as a putative
gliotransmitter (Pelligrino et al., 2011) and acts as an endogenous
agonist at P2Y GPCRs and the cation-selective ionotropic P2X
receptors, permeable to Na+, K+, and Ca2+ (Khakh et al., 2001).
P2X receptors are trimmers consisting of intracellular N- and Ctermini, a large extracellular domain containing the ATP binding
site, and two transmembrane segments that line an integral ion
pore (Kawate et al., 2009). Capillary pericytes express mRNA for
P2X1 and P2X4 receptors (Table 1), which have a pCa2+/pNa+ of
∼5 and 4.2, respectively (Khakh et al., 2001). Thus, pericyte P2X
receptors could function as sensors transducing ATP released
into the local environment into Ca2+ elevations. Several studies
have also suggested P2X7 receptors are functionally expressed
in cultured human and freshly isolated rat retinal pericytes
(Kawamura et al., 2003; Sugiyama et al., 2005; Platania et al.,
2017), though it should be noted that our expression data do
not unambiguously support the expression of this P2X isoform
in CNS pericytes.
Piezo1
Piezo1 is a large (2,521 amino acids in humans) mechanosensitive
cation channel, with three identical subunits, thought to have
38 transmembrane segments, that form a central ion conduction
pore with surrounding peripheral domains shaped like propeller
blades (Coste et al., 2010; Zhao et al., 2016, 2018; Wu et al.,
2017). Functional channels have a single channel conductance of
29 pS and a current that rapidly activates and then decays on a
millisecond timescale (Coste et al., 2010, 2015; Zhao et al., 2018).
In ECs, piezo1 can be activated by fluid shear stress, and has been
implicated in blood flow regulation, vascular development and
remodeling, and permeability (Li et al., 2014; Ranade et al., 2014;
Friedrich et al., 2019). Piezo1 may play similar roles in capillary
pericytes to mechanosensitive TRP channels in detecting
changes in blood flow, vessel diameter, or paravascular fluid
shear stress.
A BIRDS-EYE VIEW OF PERICYTE
G-PROTEIN COUPLED RECEPTORS
Pericytes express a huge variety of GPCRs (Table 2 and
Figure 4) enabling them to transduce a vast array of extracellular
stimuli into intracellular responses. As outlined above, many of
the signaling pathways triggered by GPCR signaling impinge
upon ion channel activity and thus regulate pericyte Vm and
intracellular Ca2+.
Assessment of the general characteristics of the list of GPCRs
expressed by pericytes is revealing. The majority of pericyte
GPCRs primarily interact with Gi/o α subunits. This is closely
followed by Gq-coupled GPCRs, then those that are Gs-coupled,
and the remainder couple primarily to G12/13. Perhaps tellingly,
expression of the Gnas gene, encoding the Gs α subunit, is ∼5
times higher than those collectively encoding Gq/11 α subunits,
more than double that of Gi/o α subunit genes, and more than 12
times in excess of G12/13 genes (He et al., 2018; Vanlandewijck
et al., 2018). Thus, while a wider variety of pericyte receptors
may couple to depolarizing, Ca2+-elevating processes, it appears
that hyperpolarizing Gs signaling may be a favored intracellular
transduction pathway.
Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 24 December 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 601324
Hariharan et al. CNS Pericyte Ion Channels and GPCRs
Around 12% of the receptor subtypes expressed by pericytes
are promiscuous/pleiotropic in their G-protein coupling, the
degree of which will depend on the expression levels of
the signaling elements involved and their local densities and
organization within GPCR signaling platforms. One such
example is the highly-expressed A2A adenosine receptor which
couples primarily to Gs
, but also interacts with Gq and others
(Olah, 1997; Fresco et al., 2004). Such promiscuity could
represent an inbuilt feedback mechanism to prevent Vm being
locked at hyperpolarized potentials by K+ channel activity,
by facilitating recruitment of additional transduction pathways
to promote repolarization. In contrast, the promiscuity in
signaling exhibited among receptors that couple to Gq, Gi/o, and
G12/13 would serve to reinforce depolarization. For example, the
highly expressed S1P3 and PAR1 receptors frequently exhibit
coupling to not just Gi/o, but also to both Gq and G12/13 α
subunits (Tobo et al., 2007; Means and Brown, 2009; Yue et al.,
2012).
At the time of writing, a significant portion of GPCRs
expressed by pericytes (Table 2) remain orphan receptors with
little functional data available. Strikingly, one such orphan,
GPRC5C, is the 4th most robustly expressed GPCR in these
cells. Given this lack of data, we omit this group from
further discussion.
G-PROTEIN COUPLED RECEPTOR
STRUCTURE AND SUBCLASSES
The GPCR family represents the largest family of mammalian
proteins (Lagerström and Schiöth, 2008; Katritch et al.,
2014) sharing a common 7-transmembrane topology with
an extracellular N-terminus and intracellular C-terminus. Gprotein heterotrimers are organized into four principal categories
based on the similarity of function and homology in their
α subunits: Gs
, Gi/o, Gq/11, and G12/13 (Simon et al., 1991;
Dupré et al., 2009). Broadly, the roles of these Gα subunits are
to stimulate/inhibit production of cAMP by adenylate cyclase
(AC; Gs and Gi/o, respectively), to activate PLC (Gq/11), and
to activate Rho guanine nucleotide exchange factors (GEFs)
(G12/13) (Hanlon and Andrew, 2015). The Gβγ subunit also
activates downstream signaling elements and plays a role in
GPCR mediated intracellular signaling (Dupré et al., 2009).
Below, we outline how signaling through these pathways may
modulate the activity of pericyte ion channel activity and
consequently Vm and Ca2+ signaling, and we explore what the
GPCRs expressed by pericytes might be able to tell us about
NVC mechanisms.
PKA AS A Gs- AND Gi/o-CONTROLLED
MODULATOR OF ION CHANNEL
FUNCTION
In pericytes, Gs stimulation and subsequent PKA engagement is
likely to drive phosphorylation of a number of ion channel targets
including KATP, a range of TRP channels, VDCCs, and IP3Rs—
modulating their activity and thus Vm and cellular behavior
(Figure 9). GsPCR activation leads to association of the Gαs
subunit with a cleft in the C2 domain of AC, catalyzing the
conversion of ATP to cAMP (Sadana and Dessauer, 2009). cAMP
then activates PKA by binding to its two regulatory subunits,
inducing the dissociation of two catalytic subunits, enabling their
subsequent phosphorylation of downstream targets (SassoneCorsi, 2012). In contrast, Gi/o activation inhibits AC, opposing
GsPCR activity. Here, Gαi/o binds to the C1 domain of AC to
inhibit enzymatic activity, although this is limited to the AC-I,
-V, and -VI isoforms (Sadana and Dessauer, 2009).
Gs-cAMP-PKA Signaling Augments
Hyperpolarizing K+ Currents in Pericytes
Kir channels are likely key determinants of pericyte Vm, and
as noted previously KATP channel activity is bidirectionally
modulated by cAMP levels. At tonic, low concentrations
of cAMP, PKA increases vascular KATP channel activity
by phosphorylating multiple sites on the pore-forming and
regulatory subunits (Quinn et al., 2004; Shi et al., 2007, 2008b).
At higher concentrations, cAMP conversely inhibits KATP
channel activity in a Ca2+-dependent manner via engagement
of the ubiquitous exchange protein activated by cAMP (Epac)-
1 (Purves et al., 2009). PKA is preferentially activated by
cAMP over Epac1, exhibiting a 30-fold lower EC50 (∼1 vs.
30µM; Purves et al., 2009). Accordingly, it seems that Gs
activity will preferentially favor membrane hyperpolarization
through KATP engagement. Consistent with this, activation of
Gs-coupled adenosine receptors leads to a dramatic increase in
retinal pericyte K+ currents (Li and Puro, 2001). High-level
accumulation of cAMP might in turn be expected to act as an
inbuilt concentration-based feedback mechanism to inhibit the
channel through Epac1 engagement.
In addition to such concentration-dependent regulation
of channel activity, spatial considerations are important in
determining the functional outcome of cAMP elevations. The
assembly of ACs and phosphodiesterases into membranebound scaffolds organized around A-kinase anchoring proteins
(AKAPs) has been suggested to facilitate the generation of
microdomains of cAMP (Arora et al., 2013; Lefkimmiatis
and Zaccolo, 2014). Such compartmentalization may facilitate
specific, local adjustment of, for example, KATP channel activity
in a select part of the cell (e.g., a thin-strand process or around
a peg-socket junction in the case of pericytes) without impacting
ion channels in other regions.
Complementary to the activation by PKA that KATP channels
exhibit, Kir2.2 is also positively regulated by PKA (Zitron
et al., 2004). Moreover, several Kv isoforms expressed by
pericytes exhibit PKA sensitivity, in that the activity of
Kv7.4/7.5 heteromers or Kv7.5 homomers is potentiated by PKA
activation (Mani et al., 2016). Kv2.1 membrane trafficking is
also controlled by a PKA-dependent mechanism (Wu et al.,
2015). Collectively, these data suggest a key stimulatory role
for Gs-cAMP-PKA signaling in the regulation of pericyte K+
Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 25 December 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 601324
Hariharan et al. CNS Pericyte Ion Channels and GPCRs
FIGURE 9 | Potential Gs- and Gi/o-coupled GPCR–ion channel interactions in capillary pericytes. GsPCR activation promotes (green) adenylate cyclase (AC) activity,
whereas Gi/oPCR activation inhibits (red) AC. AC in turn generates cAMP from ATP, which stimulates PKA activity. PKA interacts with a broad range of ion channels. In
pericytes, its activity is expected to couple to plasma membrane K+ and VDCC activity, with mixed effects on TRP channel activity. K+ channel hyperpolarization will
oppose VDCC activity and thus the overall effect of Gs stimulation is membrane hyperpolarization.
Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 26 December 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 601324
Hariharan et al. CNS Pericyte Ion Channels and GPCRs
channels, along with potential negative feedback mechanisms to
prevent over-activation.
Gs-Mediated Reduction of TRP Channel
Activity Complements K+ Channel
Engagement
TRP channels are extensively regulated by Gs activity, and in
contrast to K+ channels this typically leads to a decrease in
activity. Focusing on the TRP isoforms expressed by pericytes,
TRPC3, TRPC4, TRPC6, and TRPML1 are all inhibited by PKA
phosphorylation (Vergarajauregui et al., 2008; Nishioka et al.,
2011; Sung et al., 2011). In contrast, TRPM4 exhibits activation
as a result of Gs stimulation in an Epac1-and IP3R-mediated
Ca2+ release-dependent manner (Mironov and Skorova, 2011),
and TRPM7 can also be potentiated by PKA (Takezawa et al.,
2004). Phosphorylation of TRPP1 by PKA also increases channel
Po (Cantero del Rocío et al., 2015).
Thus, regulation of TRP channels via PKA is complex but it
appears that this will to lean toward PKA-dependent inhibition of
currents in pericytes. This reinforces the notion that engagement
of PKA will shift the balance of ion channel activity to favor
membrane hyperpolarization via K+ channel activity, while
reducing Na+ and Ca2+ influx via TRP channels.
Gs Activation May Promote Increases in
Intracellular Ca2+
As noted, augmentation of Cav1.2 is primarily dependent on
PKA phosphorylation of Rad to relieve channel inhibition
(Liu et al., 2020). PKA phosphoregulation of Cav1.2 is also
dependent on the AKAP isoform present in the macromolecular
environment of the channel: AKAP15 permits sensitization
of the channel whereas calcineurin associated with AKAP79
suppresses PKA-mediated increases in Cav1.2 activity via
dephosphorylation (Fuller et al., 2014). scRNAseq data (He et al.,
2018; Vanlandewijck et al., 2018) indicate that pericytes express
AKAP79 at low levels whilst expressing high levels of AKAP15,
suggesting Gs-stimulation in pericytes will favor increases in
Cav1.2 channel activity. Along similar lines, an increase in
PKA activity induces sensitization of Cav1.3 (Mahapatra et al.,
2012), and Cav3.1 currents are augmented in a cAMP/PKAdependent manner (Li et al., 2012). Moreover, the current of
Cav3.2 is increased by cAMP, an effect that depends upon
AKAP79/150, and its gene expression is also up-regulated by
Gs-signaling, suggesting a mechanism for long term T-type
VDCC regulation (Liu et al., 2010; Sekiguchi and Kawabata,
2013). Accordingly, PKA activity should increase VDCC channel
activity but, due to its voltage-dependence, in the broader
context of the pericyte ion channel repertoire this must be
weighed against simultaneous increases in activity of multiple K+
channels which will hyperpolarize Vm and keep VDCCs closed.
IP3Rs also possess phosphorylation sites for PKA (Ferris
et al., 1991a; Vanderheyden et al., 2009) and can also be directly
influenced by cAMP (Tovey et al., 2010), allowing for direct
crosstalk between cAMP and Ca2+ release pathways. Indeed,
phosphorylation by PKA induces an increase in sensitivity of
the receptor for IP3, promoting IP3-induced Ca2+ release, while
Epac1 activation also potentiates Ca2+ release (Vanderheyden
et al., 2009; Mironov and Skorova, 2011).
Drawing all of these threads together, the complement of PKA
targets and their relative expression levels in pericytes suggests
that the Gs-coupled receptors here likely primarily transduce
stimuli into Vm hyperpolarization, but may in some cases also
elevate intracellular Ca2+ via release from stores.
The Gs Receptor Complement of Pericytes
Suggest a Range of Potential Mediators for
the Regulation of Blood Flow
Pericytes express a range of receptors that couple to Gs–of
particular note are the adenosine A2A receptor, the PACAP
receptor, PAC1, the prostacyclin IP receptor and the PTHtype 1 receptor (PTHR1). The expression of these suggests the
possibility that their endogenous agonists could be released
onto pericytes during neuronal activity to evoke membrane
hyperpolarization and electrical signaling to increase blood flow
(Figure 6).
The vasodilatory effects of adenosine, an abundant metabolic
byproduct, have long been appreciated (Drury and SzentGyörgyi, 1929). In the brain, adenosine is released into the
extracellular space by widely-expressed nucleoside transporters,
or more commonly accumulates through the extracellular
catabolism of ATP by ectonucleotidases (Cunha, 2016). Recent
in vivo work showing a reliable correlation between extracellular
adenosine accumulation and rapid increases in local O2 suggest
that adenosine is capable of acting as a neurovascular coupling
mediator (Wang and Venton, 2017), and clear links have been
established between sensory stimulation, adenosine receptor
engagement, and increases in cerebral blood flow (Ko et al.,
1990; Dirnagl et al., 1994). The precise cellular and molecular
mechanisms underlying this linkage remain to be determined,
and actions through pericyte adenosine receptors are a strong
candidate for mediating these effects.
Considering prostanoids also, blockade of Gs-coupled IP
receptors impairs neuronal activity-evoked vasodilation (Lacroix
et al., 2015), which suggests a role for the classic vasodilator
prostacyclin—produced in the same metabolic pathway as
PGE2—in NVC. This possibility remains little explored, but the
expression of IP receptors in pericytes provides a potential target
for capillary endothelium-generated prostacyclin.
PACAP is a 27- or 38-amino acid neuropeptide that is an
extremely potent vasodilatory agent (Koide et al., 2014). PACAP
polypeptides are produced throughout the brain where they act
as neurotransmitters and also have neurotrophic effects. These
peptides are released by both neurons and astrocytes during
activity and thus PACAP accumulation in the paravascular
space could feasibly activate pericyte Gs-coupled PAC1 receptors
(Johnson et al., 2020), warranting further exploration of their
potential involvement in NVC.
Finally, PTHR1 binds the endocrine ligand PTH and
the paracrine ligand PTH-related protein-1 (PTHrP1) (Vilardaga et al., 2011). Intriguingly, PTH binding to
PTHR1 triggers sustained and prolonged cAMP production
by retaining the intact ligand-receptor complex even after
Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 27 December 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 601324
Hariharan et al. CNS Pericyte Ion Channels and GPCRs
endocytosis (Ferrandon et al., 2009). This could have important
implications for pericyte Gs signaling if PTH is released during
neuronal activity.
Gi/o-Coupled P2Y14 Receptor Signaling
May Impart Sensitivity to Local Metabolic
Substrate Availability
The purinergic family P2Y14 receptor is the most robustly
expressed GPCR in pericytes. This receptor signals through Gi/o
and is activated by uridine diphosphate (UDP) and nucleotide
sugars—most potently by UDP-glucose (Harden et al., 2010).
UDP-glucose is synthesized from glucose and acts as a glucose
donor in the synthesis of glycogen, which is present at modest
levels in the brain (Leloir et al., 1959; Breckenridge and Crawford,
1960; Öz et al., 2015). This and related nucleotide sugars also act
as donors for glycosylation in the ER lumen and Golgi apparatus
(Berninsone and Hirschberg, 1998), and as a consequence these
molecules are thought to be released under basal and simulated
conditions from a broad range of cells, primarily through
vesicular transport accompanying glycoconjugate delivery to the
cell membrane (Harden et al., 2010; Lazarowski, 2012). The
released nucleotide sugars have been hypothesized to act in
an autocrine or paracrine manner on local P2Y14 receptors
(Lazarowski and Harden, 2015), and as the hydrolyzation of
UDP-glucose is three times slower than that of ATP, this has
been suggested to result in long-duration signaling (Lazarowski,
2006). As its synthesis is dependent on glucose, we speculate that
UDP-glucose signaling through P2Y14 may function to notify
pericytes of local energy substrate availability: in conditions of
ample glucose, UDP-glucose maintains activity of P2Y14, which
through Gi/o signaling would counterbalance cAMP generation
and prevent PKA activation of KATP and other K+ channels. In
the event that glucose levels fall, such as during neuronal activity
(Hu and Wilson, 1997; Paulson et al., 2010; Li and Freeman, 2015;
Pearson-Leary and McNay, 2016) or in situations of metabolic
stress, the loss of this negative feedback could be relieved, leading
to cAMP elevations and engagement of KATP and other K+
channels to increase blood flow and replenish local glucose.
mGluR3 and mGluR7 May Impart Glutamate
Sensing Capabilities to Pericytes
The Gi/o-coupled metabotropic glutamate receptors mGluR3
and mGluR7 are both localized in presynaptic terminals of
GABAergic and glutamatergic synapses, and mGluR3 is also
found in glia (Harrison et al., 2008; Palazzo et al., 2016). Like
other mGluRs, these receptors contain a large N-terminal venus
flytrap domain with a glutamate binding site that dimerizes
with that of neighboring mGluRs. mGluR7 has a comparatively
low affinity for glutamate and is thus activated only by its
accumulation at high extracellular concentrations, but is also
activated by elevations of intracellular Ca2+ through CaM
interactions with its C-terminal tail. In neurons activity of
these receptors exerts a hyperpolarizing influence that depresses
synaptic activity through the lowering of cAMP, activation of
G protein-coupled Kir (GIRK) channels and the inhibition of
VDCCs (Niswender and Conn, 2010). Pericytes do not express
GIRKs, but they do express a range of VDCCs (Table 1). Thus,
although the physiological roles of mGluRs in pericytes remain to
be ascertained, their expression here implies that any glutamate
elevations in the vicinity of pericytes could drive cAMP inhibition
via mGluR3 and mGluR7 activation, and a reduction in Ca2+
entry via VDCCs.
PKC TARGETS: Gq-DEPENDENT
MODULATION OF PERICYTE ION
CHANNELS
Activation of the Gq α subunit stimulates phospholipase
C (PLC), which mediates the conversion of membrane
phospholipids to DAG and IP3, inducing PKC activation and
Ca2+ release, respectively, which may affect a broad range of ion
channels (Figure 10). We focus below on the ramifications of
PKC signaling.
Gq-DAG-PKC Signaling Will Promote
Depolarizing Currents in Pericytes
Activated PKC phosphorylates a diverse range of ion channels
and is thus capable of exerting considerable influence on Vm.
PKCs are divided into three subfamilies depending on their
activation requirements: conventional PKCs require DAG, Ca
2+
and a phospholipid for activation; novel PKCs require DAG but
are independent of Ca2+; atypical PKCs require neither of these
(Newton, 2010). CNS capillary pericytes express PKC isoforms
from each of these subfamilies (Table 3).
All three IP3R isoforms can be phosphorylated by PKC.
PKC phosphorylation of IP3R1 is potentiated by prior
phosphorylation by PKA and increases Ca2+ release (Ferris
et al., 1991a,b; Vermassen et al., 2004; Vanderheyden et al.,
2009). In contrast, IP3R2 and IP3R3 are each inhibited by
Ca2+-sensitive, conventional PKCs (Arguin et al., 2007; Caron
et al., 2007).
Kir channels are also extensively regulated by PKC, where
phosphorylation inhibits Kir6.1-containing KATP channels,
contrasting starkly with the stimulatory effects of PKA. This
phosphorylation is graded—multiple serine residues (ser354,−379,−385,−397, and−397 in the Kir6.1 C-terminal
domain) can be phosphorylated, and the degree of inhibition
is proportional to the number of these sites that receive a
phosphoryl group from PKC (Shi et al., 2008b). In pericytes this
graded response to PKC for the highly expressed KATP channel
could provide a means to fine tune activity, by permitting the
degree of local Gq signaling to oppose the stimulatory effects or
PKA or ATP depletion. PKC also regulates the membrane density
of Kir6.1, in that the PKCε isoform induces internalization of
the receptor in a caveolin-dependent manner (Jiao et al.,
2008), providing another avenue to decrease KATP channel
activity. Likewise, Kir2.2 has multiple sites that inhibit channel
current upon phosphorylation by PKC, but the graded PKC
phosphorylation observed for Kir6.1 is absent (Kim et al., 2015;
Scherer et al., 2016).
TRP channels are subject to complex regulation by Gq
activity, with important roles for DAG, detailed above, and
Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 28 December 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 601324
Hariharan et al. CNS Pericyte Ion Channels and GPCRs
FIGURE 10 | Potential GqPCR-ion channel interactions in capillary pericytes. GqPCR activation engages PLC, leading to the hydrolysis of PIP2 into IP3 and DAG. IP3
evokes Ca2+ release from the ER via resident IP3Rs, which may engage CaCCs and KCa channels. DAG stimulates PKC which has mixed effects on the TRP
channels expressed by pericytes, promotes VDCC activity, and inhibits KATP, Kir, and Kv channels. The net effect of engagement of GqPCRs is thus membrane
depolarization and intracellular Ca2+ elevation.
Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 29 December 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 601324
Hariharan et al. CNS Pericyte Ion Channels and GPCRs
TABLE 3 | Expression of PKC isoforms in brain capillary pericytes, and their modes of activation and regulation.
PKC isoform Gene name Average
counts/cell
(annotated as
a pericyte)
Class Ca2+ activation DAG activation Phospholipid
activation
Regulation by
arachidonic
acid
PKC-α Prkca 6.57 Conventional Yes Yes Yes +
PKC-β1 Prkcb
17.45
Conventional Yes Yes Yes +
PKC-β2 Prkcb Conventional Yes Yes Yes +
PKC-γ Prkcg 13.19 Conventional Yes Yes Yes +
PKC-δ Prkcd 5.93 Novel No Yes No –
PKC-ε Prkce 6.65 Novel No Yes No Insensitive
PKC-η Prkch 1.25 Novel No Yes No +
PKC-θ Prkcq 0.04 Novel No Yes No Insensitive
PKC-ι Prkci 22.30 Atypical Insensitive Insensitive Yes Insensitive
PKC-ζ Prkcz 0.06 Atypical Insensitive Insensitive Yes Insensitive
mRNA average counts per cell were mined from He et al. (2018) and Vanlandewijck et al. (2018). For regulation by arachidonic acid, “+” denotes an increase in enzymatic activity, while
“–” represents a decrease in enzymatic activity.
PKC. TRPC3 and TRPC6 in particular are inhibited by PKC
despite activation by other elements of the Gq signaling cascade
(Bousquet et al., 2010; Earley and Brayden, 2015), and TRPC1
is in contrast activated by PKC (Xiao et al., 2017). TRPM4 can
be phosphorylated by PKC to sensitize the receptor to Ca2+
(Nilius et al., 2005), which augments Na+ entry in response to
subsequent local Ca2+ elevations.
Cav1.2 currents are enhanced by phosphorylation at Ser1928
by PKC isoforms from each subfamily (PKCα, PKCε, and PKCζ),
permitting a broad range of conditions to regulate VDCC
activity (Yang et al., 2005). As pericytes express members of all
three subfamilies of PKC, regulation of Cav1.2 activity may be
similarly robust in these cells. Cav1.2 surface expression is also
increased within minutes of Gq stimulation via a PKC-dependent
increase in channel trafficking to the plasma membrane (Raifman
et al., 2017). In contrast, Cav1.3 is negatively regulated by both
conventional and atypical PKC isoforms (PKCβ2 and the PKCε,
respectively), both of which are expressed in CNS pericytes
(Table 3). As for T-type channels, Cav3.1 activity is stimulated by
PKC phosphorylation, independently of trafficking (Park et al.,
2006), and Cav3.2 is negatively regulated by Ca2+-independent
PKCη phosphorylation (Zhang Y. et al., 2018), although PKCη is
absent in pericytes.
PKCα also activates CaCCs to promote Cl− efflux, where
phosphorylation shifts the EC50 of intracellular Ca2+ from 349
to 63 nM for channel activation at −80 mV (Dutta et al., 2016).
Pulling these threads together, it seems that PKC activation as
a result of Gq activity in pericytes will contrast with the effects of
Gs-cAMP-PKA signaling by enhancing activity of depolarizing
ion channels such as VDCCs, TRP channels, and CaCCs while
inhibiting hyperpolarizing channels such as KATP and Kir.
Given that Gq activity also induces the release of Ca2+ from
intracellular stores via IP3Rs, Ca2+-sensitive PKC activation may
act as a further amplification loop to increase the signal:noise
ratio of Gq signaling and promote Ca2+ accumulation
and depolarization.
Thromboxane and ETA Receptors Are
Gq-Coupled Mediators of SMC
Constriction That Are Robustly Expressed
by Capillary Pericytes
The Gq-coupled thromboxane (TP) receptor is well-known to
induce vasoconstriction by SMCs (Dorn and Becker, 1993) and
contractile mural cells of 1st−4th order vessels (Mishra et al.,
2016). The TP receptor’s endogenous agonists include a range
of eicosanoid lipids that are generated from arachidonic acid
(AA), which is initially mobilized from membrane phospholipid
pools by the action of Ca2+-dependent phospholipase A2
(PLA2; Balsinde et al., 2002). Subsequently, cyclooxygenase or
prostaglandin H2 (PGH2) synthase enzymes convert AA to
PGH2, a potent agonist of the TP receptor. Further processing of
PGH2 yields thromboxane-A2 (TxA2), a still more potent agonist
(Bos et al., 2004; Woodward et al., 2011). Alternatively, AA can
be shuttled down a cytochrome P450 ω-hydroxylase pathway to
generate the TP agonist 20-HETE (Miyata and Roman, 2005).
The contractile influence of 20-HETE has been suggested to play
a major role in determining the diameter of cerebral arterioles
and thus controlling brain blood flow (Attwell et al., 2010), and
the activation of TP receptors has also been suggested to cause
mild, slow contractions of capillary pericytes (Fernández-Klett
et al., 2010). It is unknown whether pericyte TP receptors are
basally active to produce this effect in vivo, but subtle changes
in capillary diameter induced by this process could regulate local
blood flow over the long term, dependent on the local levels of
these agonists.
The ETA receptor shares broad similarities with the TP
receptor. Its principal transduction pathway is also Gq—although
coupling to other G proteins such as G12/13 has been noted—
and similar to the TP receptor, its activation evokes robust
SMC contractions (Sokolovsky, 1995; Horinouchi et al., 2013;
Davenport et al., 2016). The agonist of the ETA receptor,
Endothelin-1, is constitutively released by ECs, SMCs, neurons
and astrocytes (Russell and Davenport, 1999; Thorin and Webb,
Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 30 December 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 601324
Hariharan et al. CNS Pericyte Ion Channels and GPCRs
2010; Freeman et al., 2014). In culture, release of endothelin-1
from ECs has been noted to drive changes in pericyte morphology
through reorganization of F-actin and intermediate filaments
(Dehouck et al., 1997), suggesting that ECs could regulate their
coverage by pericyte processes through ETA signaling. In the
context of Alzheimer’s disease, aberrant ETA signaling caused
by amyloid β accumulation results in capillary constriction by
overlying pericytes which may limit oxygen and glucose delivery
to the parenchyma (Nortley et al., 2019).
As described above, signaling through these receptors is
expected to oppose Gs-cAMP-PKA signaling while promoting
membrane depolarization and elevation of Ca2+.
Crosstalk and Control of G Protein
Signaling Pathways
The preceding discussion illustrates that many channels
expressed by pericytes are differentially regulated by PKA and
PKC phosphorylation, and thus their activity will depend in part
on the balance of activity between these pathways. Crosstalk
between these pathways also occurs at the level of effectors, in
addition to ultimate phosphorylation targets. For example, the
Gq and Gi/o pathways oppose the Gs pathway at the level of AC,
which can be Ca2+ sensitive and modulated by PKC, dependent
on isoform (Chern, 2000). Indeed, the most highly expressed
AC isoform in brain pericytes is ACVI (Table 4), which is
regulated by PKC, Gi/o, Ca2+, and Gβγ (Chern, 2000; Sadana
and Dessauer, 2009). This regulation is mirrored for Gs acting
on the Gq pathway, where PKA can directly inhibit the activity
of PLC via phosphorylation (Nalli et al., 2014). Accordingly, Gsand Gq-coupled receptors functionally oppose one another at
multiple levels of their transduction pathways, which will help
push the membrane potential toward either hyperpolarization or
depolarization, respectively.
Another layer of control is provided by regulators of GPCR
signaling (RGS)—small proteins that regulate the duration and
intensity of GPCR signaling by driving GTPase activity of the
Gα subunit and accelerating the hydrolysis of GTP, thereby
TABLE 4 | Expression of isoforms of adenylate cyclase (AC) by CNS pericytes.
AC isoform Gene name Average counts/cell
(annotated as a pericyte)
AC-I Adcy1 0.79
AC-II Adcy2 0.31
AC-III Adcy3 15.18
AC-IV Adcy4 11.33
AC-V Adcy5 8.27
AC-VI Adcy6 89.98
AC-VII Adcy7 1.34
AC-VIII Adcy8 0.05
AC-IX Adcy9 55.32
AC-X Adcy10 0.34
mRNA average counts per cell were mined from He et al. (2018) and Vanlandewijck et al.
(2018).
inactivating their target (Ross and Wilkie, 2000; Kach et al.,
2012). Capillary pericytes express high levels of RGS4 and 5
(Bondjers et al., 2003; He et al., 2018; Vanlandewijck et al.,
2018) that act as GTPase activating proteins for Gi/o and Gq/11
subunits, while seemingly sparing Gs (Berman et al., 1996;
Watson et al., 1996; Hepler et al., 1997; Huang et al., 1997; Cho
et al., 2003; Gunaje et al., 2011). Intriguingly, RGS4 is known
to be phosphorylated by PKA and PKG, which stimulate its
activity, accelerating the deactivation of Gq/11 and inhibiting
the hydrolysis of phosphoinositide to IP3 (Huang et al., 2007).
Therefore, RGS engagement in pericytes may complement and
amplify the hyperpolarizing effects of Gs signaling by stifling the
depolarizing influences of Gi/o and Gq/11.
RhoA TARGETS: G12/13-SIGNALING
Capillary pericytes express several G12/13-coupled receptors,
including a range of lysophospholipid receptors with important
roles in lipid signaling, the promiscuous protease activated
receptor PAR1, and several orphan receptors (Table 2). G12/13
activation couples to a number of interacting partners including
cadherins, AKAPs, non-receptor tyrosine kinases and protein
phosphatases, though its interaction with Ras homolog family
member A (RhoA) is the best characterized (Worzfeld et al.,
2008). In SMCs, RhoA engagement of its downstream effector
Rho-associated kinase is known to contribute to a range of
receptor-mediated contractile responses (Swärd et al., 2003).
RhoA is also frequently observed to be activated downstream
of ion channel engagement, including TRPC6 and TRPM7
channels (Canales et al., 2019) and VDCCs (Fernández-Tenorio
et al., 2011). RhoA modulating ion channel activity is less
frequently reported, but RhoA may indirectly modulate Vm on
slow time scales by promoting the endocytosis and translocation
of channels such as Kv1.2, IP3Rs, and TRPC1 (Mehta et al.,
2003; Mayor and Pagano, 2007; Stirling et al., 2009) and possibly
KATP channels (Foster and Coetzee, 2015). Effects of RhoA on
Kir2.1 channel activity have also been reported, although the
mechanistic details of this interaction have not been fully clarified
(Jones, 2003).
Gβγ SIGNALING AND PERICYTE
FUNCTION
Initially, the Gβγ subunit was viewed as a negative regulator
of the Gα subunit, serving to increase signal:noise ratio and
specificity of signaling by preventing aberrant Gα activity in
the absence of an agonist, but has since been found to be
an active effector in its own right (Dupré et al., 2009), and
may play important roles in pericyte physiology. Gβγ interacts
with a range of canonical effectors (for example PLCβ, AC,
GIRKs; Chern, 2000; Smrcka, 2008) along with a growing list
of non-canonical effectors such as mitochondrial ATP synthase,
a range of nuclear transcription factors, cytoskeletal regulators
involved in motility, and constituents of the extracellular signal
regulated kinase (ERK) pathway. These interactions implicate
Gβγ in signaling roles as diverse as regulation of transcriptional
Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 31 December 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 601324
Hariharan et al. CNS Pericyte Ion Channels and GPCRs
activity, modulation of mRNA processing, control of nuclear
import/export, cell motility, and oxidative phosphorylation
(Khan et al., 2016). In addition to regulation of AC VI (Sadana
and Dessauer, 2009)—the most highly expressed pericyte AC
isoform (Table 4)—Gβγ signaling may also exert direct effects on
pericyte Vm through activation of Kv7.4 (Stott et al., 2015). In
contrast Cav2.1, Cav3.2, and TRPM3 can be inhibited through
Gβγ-dependent mechanisms (Hu et al., 2009; Zamponi and
Currie, 2013; Alkhatib et al., 2019).
PERICYTE GPCRs THAT COUPLE TO
MULTIPLE G PROTEINS
The previously discussed GPCRs are largely selective in their
G protein coupling, allowing for precise intracellular signaling
in response to a range of stimuli. However, many GPCRs
that are highly expressed in pericytes are capable of signaling
through multiple G proteins. This may represent pleiotropy—
physiological activation of different G proteins in response to
differing signals—or promiscuity, i.e., engaging in non-preferred
G protein interactions due to high levels of receptor expression
or excessive stimulation (Maudsley et al., 2005). Here, we review
examples of highly-expressed pericyte GPCRs with a tendency to
couple to multiple G proteins.
S1P Receptors
Sphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P) is a lipid mediator formed
through the action of ceramidase on lipids of the plasma
membrane (Ksiazek et al., 2015). S1P is constitutively released
by erythrocytes and its plasma concentration strongly correlates
with hematocrit (Selim et al., 2011; Ksiazek et al., 2015). The
transporter-mediated release of S1P from ECs has also been
documented (Kerage et al., 2014) along with the export of the
enzyme that catalyzes its formation, sphingosine kinase (Ancellin
et al., 2002). This leads to S1P signaling in the vasculature,
which is particularly important for maintenance of the BBB
(Janiurek et al., 2019), vasoconstriction (Salomone et al., 2010),
angiogenesis, and regulation of vascular tone at the level of
arterioles (Kerage et al., 2014).
Pericytes are ideally positioned to sense the release of S1P from
local ECs. The actions of S1P are mediated through a family of
receptors that act through Gi/o, Gq, and G12/13 signaling, with
S1P2 and the robustly expressed S1P3 coupling to each of these
(Means and Brown, 2009). Accordingly, S1P sensed by pericytes
is expected to promote PLC engagement, Ca2+ elevations, a
fall in cAMP, and depolarization, but further information as
to the physiological roles of signaling through these receptors
awaits experimental attention. As pericytes are critical for the
maintenance of blood-brain barrier tightness (Armulik et al.,
2010), it is possible that S1P signaling contributes to this process.
S1P signaling also strengthens contact between ECs and pericytes
in culture through a mechanism involving the trafficking and
activation of the adhesion molecule N-cadherin by ECs (Paik
et al., 2004), and it is thus possible that this is mirrored in
pericytes to contribute to this interaction and maintain pegsocket junctions.
PAR1 May Regulate Pericyte Thin-Strand
Processes
Protease-activated receptor (PAR) 1 is a member of the
PAR family and is stimulated by external proteases such as
thrombin and trypsin. The proteolytic action of these enzymes
on the extracellular domain of the receptor reveal an Nterminal tethered ligand sequence, exposure of which results in
irreversible activity of the receptor that is halted only by its
internalization (Soh et al., 2010). PARs are broadly expressed
in the neurovascular unit, found in neurons, glia, ECs and
SMCs, as well as pericytes. PAR1 couples to Gq, Gi/o, and
G12/13, and while the release or activation of agonists for these
receptors is typically associated with injury or inflammatory
responses (Ma and Dorling, 2012; Yue et al., 2012), they have also
been implicated in cell proliferation and differentiation, synaptic
plasticity (Noorbakhsh et al., 2003), and driving vasodilation
(Villari et al., 2017). Interestingly, thrombin signaling regulates
morphology of fine processes in astrocytes through RhoA, and
similar effects have been noted in neurons (Noorbakhsh et al.,
2003). In line with this, it is possible that PAR1 signaling regulates
the dynamics of pericyte process extension and retraction on
capillaries (Berthiaume et al., 2018).
FRIZZLED AND ADHESION GPCRs IN
PERICYTES
Finally, pericytes also express a range of members of the
frizzled family of GPCRs. These are receptors for Wnt
proteins, and G-protein coupling is of less importance in this
group. Instead, canonical frizzled signaling occurs through the
β-catenin pathway (MacDonald et al., 2009), but G protein
coupling through signaling platforms assembled around the
FZD-associated phosphoprotein Disheveled is also possible. The
latter facilitates activation of Gq- and Gi/o-proteins to produce
Ca2+ elevations and PKC engagement (Schulte, 2010; Kilander
et al., 2014). Further research is required to infer the functional
implications of pericyte expression of frizzled receptors, but
developmental and homeostatic roles seem likely, as these are
major aspects of Wnt signaling (Yang, 2012). Low levels of the
adhesion class cadherin EGF lag seven pass receptors (CELSR)2
are also seen in pericytes.
CONTROL OF PERICYTE Vm BY PERICYTE
ION CHANNELS AND
GPCRs—CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE
PERSPECTIVES
The ion channels and GPCRs expressed by capillary pericytes
represent a toolkit for the dynamic control of pericyte
membrane potential and function. Among a panoply of roles
for these signaling elements, the robust expression of genes
encoding K+ channels and GsPCRs and their second messenger
components implies an important role for pericyte membrane
hyperpolarization, which we suggest contributes to long-range
electrical signaling to control blood flow (Figure 6). Importantly,
Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 32 December 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 601324
Hariharan et al. CNS Pericyte Ion Channels and GPCRs
disturbances in blood flow and the processes that regulate it
are increasingly appreciated to play a key role in a variety
of pathological conditions. These include dementias such as
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) (Alsop et al., 2000; Iadecola, 2004;
Nicolakakis and Hamel, 2011; Iturria-Medina et al., 2016), small
vessel disease of the brain (Dabertrand et al., 2015; Capone et al.,
2016; Huneau et al., 2018), psychological conditions such as
schizophrenia (Mathew et al., 1988; Zhu et al., 2017) and chronic
stress (Longden et al., 2014; Han et al., 2019), plus diabetes (Mogi
and Horiuchi, 2011; Vetri et al., 2012), hypertension (Girouard
and Iadecola, 2006; Capone et al., 2012), and stroke (Girouard
and Iadecola, 2006; Koide et al., 2012; Balbi et al., 2017), and
pericytes appear to be exceptionally sensitive to pathological
perturbations (Winkler et al., 2011).
The ion channels and GPCRs that are highly expressed by
brain pericytes thus have the potential to be pharmacological
targets for vascular disorders, metabolic diseases, and
neurodegenerative and neurological disorders (wherein for
example KATP channels, IP3Rs, VDCCs, TRP channels, and
GPCRs such as A2A and ETA receptors have been implicated, to
name but a few; Hübner and Jentsch, 2002; Jacobson and Gao,
2006; Nilius et al., 2007; Ohkita et al., 2012; Aziz et al., 2014;
Mikoshiba, 2015). Thus, furthering our understanding of the
mechanisms through which pericytes contribute to blood flow
control in the brain is a critical step in the search for ways in
which to prevent decline or restore function in these disease
contexts. The data we have discussed underscore that we are at
an early stage in our understanding of how pericyte ion channels
and GPCRs contribute to these functions, and warrant further
studies to reveal novel mechanisms and therapeutic targets.
In the future, it will be important to determine the precise
effects of both hyperpolarization and depolarization on pericyte
functional outputs, for which optogenetic technologies or
traditional electrophysiological approaches (Zhang et al.,
2011) can be leveraged. At a deeper level, questions regarding
the organization of pericyte ion channels and GPCRs await
exploration—are these organized into macromolecular
signaling complexes to facilitate privileged communication
between complementary molecular players? Are these elements
concentrated at sites to optimize cell-cell communication, such
as peg-socket junctions, or distributed more broadly throughout
the cell? What are the mechanisms that modulate the fidelity and
gain of signaling (control of gene expression, protein trafficking,
cell surface expression levels, and so on) and how are these
affected in cerebrovascular disorders? The present survey of
pericyte ion channels and GPCRs provides a map that can be
used to guide these deeper explorations.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
All authors listed have made a substantial, direct and intellectual
contribution to the work, and approved it for publication.
FUNDING
Support for this work was provided by the NIH National
Institute on Aging and National Institute of Neurological
Disorders and Stroke (1R01AG066645 and 1DP2NS121347, to
TL), the American Heart Association (17SDG33670237 and
19IPLOI34660108 to TL), and the Swedish Cancer Society
(to CB).
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors thank B. Huang for data organization and
proofreading the manuscript.
REFERENCES
Adams, P. J., Garcia, E., David, L. S., Mulatz, K. J., Spacey, S. D., and Snutch,
T. P. (2009). Cav2.1 P/Q-type calcium channel alternative splicing affects the
functional impact of familial hemiplegic migraine mutations: implications
for calcium channelopathies. Channels 3, 110–121. doi: 10.4161/chan.3.
2.7932
Adelman, J. P., Maylie, J., and Sah, P. (2012). Small-conductance Ca
2+-
activated K+ channels: form and function. Annu. Rev. Physiol. 74, 245–269.
doi: 10.1146/annurev-physiol-020911-153336
Alarcon-Martinez, L., Yilmaz-Ozcan, S., Yemisci, M., Schallek, J., Kil,iç, K., Can,
A., et al. (2018). Capillary pericytes express α-smooth muscle actin, which
requires prevention of filamentous-actin depolymerization for detection. Elife
7:e34861. doi: 10.7554/eLife.34861.017
Albert, A. P. (2011). “Gating mechanisms of canonical transient receptor
potential channel proteins: role of phosphoinositols and diacylglycerol,”
in Transient Receptor Potential Channels. Advances in Experimental
Medicine and Biology, ed M. Islam (Dordrecht: Springer), 391–411.
doi: 10.1007/978-94-007-0265-3_22
Alexander, S. P. H., Christopoulos, A., Davenport, A. P., Kelly, E., Mathie,
A., Peters, J. A., et al. (2019). The concise guide to pharmacology
2019/20: G protein-coupled receptors. Br. J. Pharmacol. 176, S21–S141.
doi: 10.1111/bph.14748
Al-Karagholi, M. A.-M., Ghanizada, H., Nielsen, C. A. W., Ansari, A., Gram, C.,
Younis, S., et al. (2020). Cerebrovascular effects of glibenclamide investigated
using high-resolution magnetic resonance imaging in healthy volunteers. J.
Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. doi: 10.1177/0271678X20959294. [Epub ahead of
print].
Alkhatib, O., da Costa, R., Gentry, C., Quallo, T., Bevan, S., and Andersson, D.
A. (2019). Promiscuous G-protein-coupled receptor inhibition of transient
receptor potential melastatin 3 ion channels by Gβγ subunits. J. Neurosci. 39,
7840–7852. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0882-19.2019
Alsop, D. C., Detre, J. A., and Grossman, M. (2000). Assessment
of cerebral blood flow in Alzheimer’s disease by spinlabeled magnetic resonance imaging. Ann. Neurol. 47, 93–100.
doi: 10.1002/1531-8249(200001)47:1<93::AID-ANA15>3.0.CO;2-8
An, M. T., and Zamponi, G. W. (2005). “Voltage-dependent inactivation of
voltage gated calcium channels,” in Voltage-Gated Calcium Channels. Molecular
Biology Intelligence Unit, ed G. W. Zamponi (Boston, MA: Springer), 194–204.
doi: 10.1007/0-387-27526-6_12
Ancellin, N., Colmont, C., Su, J., Li, Q., Mittereder, N., Chae, S. S., et al. (2002).
Extracellular export of sphingosine kinase-1 enzyme. Sphingosine 1-phosphate
generation and the induction of angiogenic vascular maturation. J. Biol. Chem.
277, 6667–6675. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M102841200
Aoki, M., Aoki, H., Ramanathan, R., Hait, N. C., and Takabe, K. (2016).
Sphingosine-1-phosphate signaling in immune cells and inflammation:
roles and therapeutic potential. Mediators Inflamm. 2016:8606878.
doi: 10.1155/2016/8606878
Arguin, G., Regimbald-Dumas, Y., Fregeau, M. O., Caron, A. Z., and Guillemette,
G. (2007). Protein kinase C phosphorylates the inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate
Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 33 December 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 601324
Hariharan et al. CNS Pericyte Ion Channels and GPCRs
receptor type 2 and decreases the mobilization of Ca2+ in pancreatoma AR4-2J
cells. J. Endocrinol. 192, 659–668. doi: 10.1677/JOE-06-0179
Armstrong, J. F., Faccenda, E., Harding, S. D., Pawson, A. J., Southan, C.,
Sharman, J. L., et al. (2020). The iuphar/bps guide to pharmacology in 2020:
extending immunopharmacology content and introducing the iuphar/mmv
guide to malaria pharmacology. Nucleic Acids Res. 48, D1006–D1021.
doi: 10.1093/nar/gkz951
Armulik, A., Abramsson, A., and Betsholtz, C. (2005). Endothelial/pericyte
interactions. Circ. Res. 97, 512–523. doi: 10.1161/01.RES.0000182903.16652.d7
Armulik, A., Genové, G., Mäe, M., Nisancioglu, M. H., Wallgard, E., Niaudet, C.,
et al. (2010). Pericytes regulate the blood-brain barrier. Nature 468, 557–561.
doi: 10.1038/nature09522
Arora, K., Sinha, C., Zhang, W., Ren, A., Moon, C. S., Yarlagadda, S.,
et al. (2013). Compartmentalization of cyclic nucleotide signaling: a
question of when, where, and why? Pflugers Arch. 465, 1397–1407.
doi: 10.1007/s00424-013-1280-6
Asmar, M., Asmar, A., Simonsen, L., Dela, F., Holst, J. J., and Bülow, J. (2019). GIPinduced vasodilation in human adipose tissue involves capillary recruitment.
Endocr. Connect. 8, 806–813. doi: 10.1530/EC-19-0144
Attwell, D., Buchan, A. M., Charpak, S., Lauritzen, M., MacVicar, B. A., and
Newman, E. A. (2010). Glial and neuronal control of brain blood flow. Nature
468, 232–243. doi: 10.1038/nature09613
Attwell, D., Mishra, A., Hall, C. N., O’Farrell, F. M., and Dalkara, T.
(2016). What is a pericyte? J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 36, 451–455.
doi: 10.1177/0271678X15610340
Aydin, F., Rosenblum, W. I., and Povlishock, J. T. (1991). Myoendothelial
junctions in human brain arterioles. Stroke 22, 1592–1597.
doi: 10.1161/01.STR.22.12.1592
Aziz, Q., Thomas, A. M., Gomes, J., Ang, R., Sones, W. R., Li, Y., et al. (2014).
The ATP-sensitive potassium channel subunit, Kir6.1, in vascular smooth
muscle plays a major role in blood pressure control. Hypertension 64, 523–529.
doi: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.114.03116
Baker, M. R., Fan, G., and Serysheva, I. I. (2017). Structure of IP3R channel:
high-resolution insights from cryo-EM. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 46, 38–47.
doi: 10.1016/j.sbi.2017.05.014
Balbi, M., Koide, M., Wellman, G. C., and Plesnila, N. (2017). Inversion of
neurovascular coupling after subarachnoid hemorrhage in vivo. J. Cereb. Blood
Flow Metab. 37, 3625–3634. doi: 10.1177/0271678X16686595
Ballanyi, K., Doutheil, J., and Brockhaus, J. (1996). Membrane potentials and
microenvironment of rat dorsal vagal cells in vitro during energy depletion. J.
Physiol. 495, 769–784. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.1996.sp021632
Balsinde, J., Winstead, M. V., and Dennis, E. A. (2002). Phospholipase
A2 regulation of arachidonic acid mobilization. FEBS Lett. 531, 2–6.
doi: 10.1016/S0014-5793(02)03413-0
Bayliss, W. M. (1902). On the local reactions of the arterial wall to changes of
internal pressure. J. Physiol. 28, 220–231. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.1902.sp000911
Beech, D. J., Zhang, H., Nakao, K., and Bolton, T. B. (1993). K channel
activation by nucleotide diphosphates and its inhibition by glibenclamide
in vascular smooth muscle cells. Br. J. Pharmacol. 110, 573–582.
doi: 10.1111/j.1476-5381.1993.tb13849.x
Berman, D. M., Wilkie, T. M., and Gilman, A. G. (1996). GAIP and RGS4 are
GTPase-activating proteins for the Gi subfamily of G protein α subunits. Cell
86, 445–452. doi: 10.1016/S0092-8674(00)80117-8
Berninsone, P., and Hirschberg, C. B. (1998). Nucleotide sugars, nucleotide sulfate,
and ATP transporters of the endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi apparatus. Ann.
N. Y. Acad. Sci. 842, 91–99. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.1998.tb09636.x
Berridge, M. (2016). The inositol trisphosphate/calcium signaling
pathway in health and disease. Physiol. Rev. 96, 1261–1296.
doi: 10.1152/physrev.00006.2016
Berridge, M. J., Lipp, P., and Bootman, M. D. (2000). The versatility and
universality of calcium signalling. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 1, 11–21.
doi: 10.1038/35036035
Berthiaume, A. A., Grant, R. I., McDowell, K. P., Underly, R. G., Hartmann,
D. A., Levy, M., et al. (2018). Dynamic remodeling of pericytes in vivo
maintains capillary coverage in the adult mouse brain. Cell Rep. 22, 8–16.
doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2017.12.016
Bezprozvanny, L., Watras, J., and Ehrlich, B. E. (1991). Bell-shaped calciumresponse curves of Ins(1,4,5)P3- and calcium-gated channels from
endoplasmic reticulum of cerebellum. Nature 351, 751–754. doi: 10.1038/35
1751a0
Bhattacharjee, A., Joiner, W. J., Wu, M., Yang, Y., Sigworth, F. J., and
Kaczmarek, L. K. (2003). Slick (Slo2.1), a rapidly-gating sodium-activated
potassium channel inhibited by ATP. J. Neurosci. 23, 11681–11691.
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.23-37-11681.2003
Bi, M. M., Hong, S., Zhou, H. Y., Wang, H. W., Wang, L. N., and Zheng, Y.
J. (2014). Chloride channelopathies of ClC-2. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 15, 218–249.
doi: 10.3390/ijms15010218
Blinder, P., Tsai, P. S., Kaufhold, J. P., Knutsen, P. M., Suhl, H., and
Kleinfeld, D. (2013). The cortical angiome: an interconnected vascular network
with noncolumnar patterns of blood flow. Nat. Neurosci. 16, 889–897.
doi: 10.1038/nn.3426
Bondjers, C., He, L., Takemoto, M., Norlin, J., Asker, N., Hellström, M., et al.
(2006). Microarray analysis of blood microvessels from PDGF-B and PDGFRβ mutant mice identifies novel markers for brain pericytes. FASEB J. 20,
E1005–E1013. doi: 10.1096/fj.05-4944fje
Bondjers, C., Kalén, M., Hellström, M., Scheidl, S. J., Abramsson, A.,
Renner, O., et al. (2003). Transcription profiling of platelet-derived growth
factor-B-deficient mouse embryos identifies RGS5 as a novel marker for
pericytes and vascular smooth muscle cells. Am. J. Pathol. 162, 721–729.
doi: 10.1016/S0002-9440(10)63868-0
Bonev, A. D., and Nelson, M. T. (1996). Vasoconstrictors inhibit ATP-sensitive K+
channels in arterial smooth muscle through protein kinase C. J. Gen. Physiol.
108, 315–323. doi: 10.1085/jgp.108.4.315
Bootman, M. D., and Bultynck, G. (2020). Fundamentals of cellular calcium
signaling: a primer. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Biol. 12:a038802.
doi: 10.1101/cshperspect.a038802
Borea, P. A., Gessi, S., Merighi, S., Vincenzi, F., and Varani, K. (2018).
Pharmacology of adenosine receptors: the state of the art. Physiol. Rev. 98,
1591–1625. doi: 10.1152/physrev.00049.2017
Borysova, L., Wray, S., Eisner, D. A., and Burdyga, T. (2013). How calcium
signals in myocytes and pericytes are integrated across in situ microvascular
networks and control microvascular tone. Cell Calcium 54, 163–174.
doi: 10.1016/j.ceca.2013.06.001
Bos, C. L., Richel, D. J., Ritsema, T., Peppelenbosch, M. P., and Versteeg, H. H.
(2004). Prostanoids and prostanoid receptors in signal transduction. Int. J.
Biochem. Cell Biol. 36, 1187–1205. doi: 10.1016/j.biocel.2003.08.006
Bousquet, S. M., Monet, M., and Boulay, G. (2010). Protein kinase C-dependent
phosphorylation of transient receptor potential canonical 6 (TRPC6) on
serine 448 causes channel inhibition. J. Biol. Chem. 285, 40534–40543.
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.160051
Breckenridge, B. M., and Crawford, E. J. (1960). Glycogen synthesis from uridine
diphosphate glucose in brain. J. Biol. Chem. 235, 3054–3057.
Bulley, S., and Jaggar, J. H. (2014). Cl− channels in smooth muscle cells. Pflügers
Arch. 466, 861–872. doi: 10.1007/s00424-013-1357-2
Burdakov, D., Petersen, O. H., and Verkhratsky, A. (2005). Intraluminal calcium
as a primary regulator of endoplasmic reticulum function. Cell Calcium 38,
303–310. doi: 10.1016/j.ceca.2005.06.010
Burdyga, T., and Borysova, L. (2014). Calcium signalling in pericytes. J. Vasc. Res.
51, 190–199. doi: 10.1159/000362687
Burke, M. A., Mutharasan, R. K., and Ardehali, H. (2008). The sulfonylurea
receptor, an atypical ATP-binding cassette protein, and its regulation of the
KATP channel. Circ. Res. 102, 164–176. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.107.165324
Cabrita, I., Benedetto, R., Fonseca, A., Wanitchakool, P., Sirianant, L., Skryabin,
B. V., et al. (2017). Differential effects of anoctamins on intracellular calcium
signals. FASEB J. 31, 2123–2134. doi: 10.1096/fj.201600797RR
Cai, C., Fordsmann, J. C., Jensen, S. H., Gesslein, B., Lønstrup, M., Hald, B. O., et al.
(2018). Stimulation-induced increases in cerebral blood flow and local capillary
vasoconstriction depend on conducted vascular responses. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 115, E5796–E5804. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1707702115
Calcraft, P. J., Arredouani, A., Ruas, M., Pan, Z., Cheng, X., Hao, X., et al. (2009).
NAADP mobilizes calcium from acidic organelles through two-pore channel.
Nature 459, 596–600. doi: 10.1038/nature08030
Canales, J., Morales, D., Blanco, C., Rivas, J., Diaz, N., Angelopoulos,
I., et al. (2019). A tr(i)p to cell migration: new roles of trp
channels in mechanotransduction and cancer. Front. Physiol. 10:757.
doi: 10.3389/fphys.2019.00757
Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 34 December 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 601324
Hariharan et al. CNS Pericyte Ion Channels and GPCRs
Cantero del Rocío, M., Velázquez, I. F., Streets, A. J., Ong, A. C. M., and
Cantiello, H. F. (2015). The cAMP signaling pathway and direct protein kinase a
phosphorylation regulate polycystin-2 (TRPP2) channel function. J. Biol. Chem.
290, 23888–23896. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.661082
Cao, C., Goo, J. H., Lee-Kwon, W., and Pallone, T. L. (2006). Vasa recta pericytes
express a strong inward rectifier K+ conductance. Am. J. Physiol. Regul. Integr.
Comp. Physiol. 290, R1601–R1607. doi: 10.1152/ajpregu.00877.2005
Capone, C., Dabertrand, F., Baron-Menguy, C., Chalaris, A., Ghezali, L.,
Domenga-Denier, V., et al. (2016). Mechanistic insights into a TIMP3-sensitive
pathway constitutively engaged in the regulation of cerebral hemodynamics.
Elife 5:e17536. doi: 10.7554/eLife.17536.042
Capone, C., Faraco, G., Peterson, J. R., Coleman, C., Anrather, J., Milner, T. A.,
et al. (2012). Central cardiovascular circuits contribute to the neurovascular
dysfunction in angiotensin II hypertension. J. Neurosci. 32, 4878–4886.
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.6262-11.2012
Carlson, E. (1989). Fenestrated subendothelial basement membranes in human
retinal capillaries. Investig. Opthalmology Vis. Sci. 30, 1923–1932.
Caron, A. Z., Chaloux, B., Arguin, G., and Guillemette, G. (2007). Protein kinase
C decreases the apparent affinity of the inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor
type 3 in RINm5F cells. Cell Calcium 42, 323–331. doi: 10.1016/j.ceca.2007.
01.002
Carvalho, J., Chennupati, R., Li, R., Günther, S., Kaur, H., Zhao, W., et al.
(2020). Orphan G protein-coupled receptor GPRC5B controls smooth muscle
contractility and differentiation by inhibiting prostacyclin receptor signaling.
Circulation 141, 1168–1183. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.119.043703
Catterall, W. A., Perez-Reyes, E., Snutch, T. P., and Striessnig, J. (2005).
International Union of Pharmacology. XLVIII. Nomenclature and structurefunction relationships of voltage-gated calcium channels. Pharmacol. Rev. 57,
411–425. doi: 10.1124/pr.57.4.5
Chasseigneaux, S., Moraca, Y., Cochois-Guégan, V., Boulay, A. C., Gilbert, A.,
Crom, S., et al. (2018). Isolation and differential transcriptome of vascular
smooth muscle cells and mid-capillary pericytes from the rat brain. Sci. Rep.
8:12272. doi: 10.1038/s41598-018-30739-5
Chaudhuri, D., Issa, J. B., and Yue, D. T. (2007). Elementary mechanisms
producing facilitation of Cav2.1 (P/Q-type) channels. J. Gen. Physiol. 129,
385–401. doi: 10.1085/jgp.200709749
Chen, X., Wang, Q., Ni, F., and Ma, J. (2010). Structure of the fulllength Shaker potassium channel Kv1.2 by normal-mode-based X-ray
crystallographic refinement. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 107, 11352–11357.
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1000142107
Cheng, H. Y., Dong, A., Panchatcharam, M., Mueller, P., Yang, F., Li, Z., et al.
(2012). Lysophosphatidic acid signaling protects pulmonary vasculature from
hypoxia-induced remodeling. Arterioscler. Thromb. Vasc. Biol. 32, 24–32.
doi: 10.1161/ATVBAHA.111.234708
Cheng, K. T., Liu, X., Ong, H. L., and Ambudkar, I. S. (2008). Functional
requirement for Orai1 in store-operated TRPC1-STIM1 channels. J. Biol. Chem.
283, 12935–12940. doi: 10.1074/jbc.C800008200
Cheng, K. T., Ong, H. L., Liu, X., and Ambudkar, I. S. (2013). Contribution and
regulation of TRPC channels in store-operated Ca2+ entry. Curr. Top. Membr.
71, 149–179. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-407870-3.00007-X
Chern, Y. (2000). Regulation of adenylyl cyclase in the central nervous
system. Cell. Signal. 12, 195–204. doi: 10.1016/S0898-6568(99)0
0084-4
Chesler, M., and Kaila, K. (1992). Modulation of pH by neuronal activity. Trends
Neurosci. 15, 396–402. doi: 10.1016/0166-2236(92)90191-A
Cheung, W., Andrade-Gordon, P., Derian, C. K., and Damiano, B. P. (1998).
Receptor-activating peptides distinguish thrombin receptor (PAR-1) and
protease activated receptor 2 (PAR-2) mediated hemodynamic responses in
vivo. Can. J. Physiol. Pharmacol. 76, 16–25. doi: 10.1139/y97-176
Chipperfield, A. R., and Harper, A. A. (2000). Chloride in smooth muscle.
Prog. Biophys. Mol. Biol. 74, 175–221. doi: 10.1016/S0079-6107(00)
00024-9
Cho, H., Kozasa, T., Bondjers, C., Betsholtz, C., and Kehrl, J. H. (2003).
Pericyte-specific expression of Rgs5: implications for PDGF and EDG receptor
signaling during vascular maturation. FASEB J. 17, 440–442. doi: 10.1096/fj.02-
0340fje
Cipolla, M. (2009). “Chapter 2: Anatomy and Ultrastructure,” in The Cerebral
Circulation (San Rafael, CA: Morgan & Claypool Life Sciences).
Cipolla, M., Li, R., and Vitullo, L. (2004). Perivascular innervation of
penetrating brain parenchymal arterioles. J. Cardiovasc. Pharmacol. 44, 1–8.
doi: 10.1097/00005344-200407000-00001
Clapham, D. E. (2003). TRP channels as cellular sensors. Nature 426, 517–524.
doi: 10.1038/nature02196
Corda, G., and Sala, A. (2017). Non-canonical WNT/PCP signalling in cancer:
Fzd6 takes centre stage. Oncogenesis 6:e364. doi: 10.1038/oncsis.2017.69
Cortijo, C., Gouzi, M., Tissir, F., and Grapin-Botton, A. (2012). Planar cell polarity
controls pancreatic beta cell differentiation and glucose homeostasis. Cell Rep.
2, 1593–1606. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2012.10.016
Coste, B., Mathur, J., Schmidt, M., Earley, T. J., Ranade, S., Petrus, M. J., et al.
(2010). Piezo1 and Piezo2 are essential components of distinct mechanically
activated cation channels. Science 330, 55–60. doi: 10.1126/science.1193270
Coste, B., Murthy, S. E., Mathur, J., Schmidt, M., Mechioukhi, Y., Delmas, P., et al.
(2015). Piezo1 ion channel pore properties are dictated by C-terminal region.
Nat. Commun. 6:7223. doi: 10.1038/ncomms8223
Crnkovic, S., Egemnazarov, B., Jain, P., Seay, U., Gattinger, N., Marsh, L. M.,
et al. (2014). NPY/Y1 receptor-mediated vasoconstrictory and proliferative
effects in pulmonary hypertension. Br. J. Pharmacol. 171, 3895–3907.
doi: 10.1111/bph.12751
Cuevas, P., Gutierrez-Diaz, J. A., Reimers, D., Dujovny, M., Diaz, F. G., and
Ausman, J. I. (1984). Pericyte endothelial gap junctions in human cerebral
capillaries. Anat. Embryol. 170, 155–159. doi: 10.1007/BF00319000
Cunha, R. A. (2016). How does adenosine control neuronal dysfunction and
neurodegeneration? J. Neurochem. 139, 1019–1055. doi: 10.1111/jnc.13724
Cvetkovic, D., Babwah, A. V., and Bhattacharya, M. (2013). Kisspeptin/K ´ ISSIR
system in breast cancer. J. Cancer 4, 653–661. doi: 10.7150/jca.7626
Dabertrand, F., Krøigaard, C., Bonev, A. D., Cognat, E., Dalsgaard, T., DomengaDenier, V., et al. (2015). Potassium channelopathy-like defect underlies earlystage cerebrovascular dysfunction in a genetic model of small vessel disease.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 112, E796–E805. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1420765112
Dang, S., Feng, S., Tien, J., Peters, C. J., Bulkley, D., Lolicato, M., et al. (2017). CryoEM structures of the TMEM16A calcium-activated chloride channel. Nature
552, 426–429. doi: 10.1038/nature25024
D’Avanzo, N., Cheng, W. W. L., Doyle, D. A., and Nichols, C. G. (2010). Direct
and specific activation of human inward rectifier K+ channels by membrane
phosphatidylinositol 4,5-Bisphosphate. J. Biol. Chem. 285, 37129–37132.
doi: 10.1074/jbc.C110.186692
Davenport, A. P., Hyndman, K. A., Dhaun, N., Southan, C., Kohan, D.
E., Pollock, J. S., et al. (2016). Endothelin. Pharmacol. Rev. 68, 357–418.
doi: 10.1124/pr.115.011833
De Henau, O., Degroot, G. N., Imbault, V., Robert, V., De Poorter, C., McHeik, S.,
et al. (2016). Signaling properties of chemerin receptors CMKLR1, GPR1 and
CCRL2. PLoS ONE 11:e0164179. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0164179
de Oliveira, P. G., Ramos, M. L. S., Amaro, A. J., Dias, R. A., and Vieira, S. I. (2019).
Gi/o-protein coupled receptors in the aging brain. Front. Aging Neurosci. 11:89.
doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2019.00089
Dehouck, M. P., Vigne, P., Torpier, G., Breittmayer, J. P., Cecchelli, R., and
Frelin, C. (1997). Endothelin-1 as a mediator of endothelial cell-pericyte
interactions in bovine brain capillaries. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 17, 464–469.
doi: 10.1097/00004647-199704000-00012
Denninger, J. W., and Marletta, M. A. (1999). Guanylate cyclase and the
NO/cGMP signaling pathway. Biochim. Biophys. Acta Bioenerg. 1411, 334–350.
doi: 10.1016/S0005-2728(99)00024-9
Díaz-Flores, L., Gutiérrez, R., Madrid, J. F., Varela, H., Valladares, F., Acosta,
E., et al. (2009). Pericytes. Morphofunction, interactions and pathology in
a quiescent and activated mesenchymal cell niche. Histol. Histopathol. 24,
909–969. doi: 10.14670/HH-24.909
Dick, I. E., Tadross, M. R., Liang, H., Tay, L. H., Yang, W., and Yue, D. T. (2008). A
modular switch for spatial Ca2+ selectivity in the calmodulin regulation of Cav
channels. Nature 451, 830–834. doi: 10.1038/nature06529
Dickson, E. J., and Hille, B. (2019). Understanding phosphoinositides: rare,
dynamic, and essential membrane phospholipids. Biochem. J. 476, 1–23.
doi: 10.1042/BCJ20180022
Dijksterhuis, J. P., Petersen, J., and Schulte, G. (2014). WNT/Frizzled signalling:
Receptor-ligand selectivity with focus on FZD-G protein signalling and its
physiological relevance: IUPHAR review 3. Br. J. Pharmacol. 171, 1195–1209.
doi: 10.1111/bph.12364
Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 35 December 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 601324
Hariharan et al. CNS Pericyte Ion Channels and GPCRs
Dirnagl, U., Niwa, K., Lindauer, U., and Villringer, A. (1994). Coupling
of cerebral blood flow to neuronal activation: role of adenosine and
nitric oxide. Am. J. Physiol. Hear. Circ. Physiol. 267, H296–H301.
doi: 10.1152/ajpheart.1994.267.1.H296
Dorn, G. W. II., and Becker, M. W. (1993). Thromboxane A2 stimulated signal
transduction in vascular smooth muscle. J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther. 265, 447–456.
Drury, A. N., and Szent-Györgyi, A. (1929). The physiological activity of adenine
compounds with especial reference to their action upon the mammalian heart.
J. Physiol. 68, 213–237. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.1929.sp002608
Duprat, F., Lesage, F., Fink, M., Reyes, R., Heurteaux, C., and Lazdunski, M. (1997).
TASK, a human background K+ channel to sense external pH variations near
physiological pH. EMBO J. 16, 5464–5471. doi: 10.1093/emboj/16.17.5464
Dupré, D. J., Robitaille, M., Rebois, R. V., and Hébert, T. E. (2009). The
role of Gβγ subunits in the organization, assembly, and function of
GPCR signaling complexes. Annu. Rev. Pharmacol. Toxicol. 49, 31–56.
doi: 10.1146/annurev-pharmtox-061008-103038
Dutta, A. K., Khimji, A. K., Liu, S., Karamysheva, Z., Fujita, A., Kresge,
C., et al. (2016). PKCα regulates TMEM16A-mediated Cl− secretion in
human biliary cells. Am. J. Physiol. Gastrointest. Liver Physiol. 310, G34–G42.
doi: 10.1152/ajpgi.00146.2015
Dutzler, R., Campbell, E. B., Cadene, M., Chait, B. T., and MacKinnon, R. (2002).
X-ray structure of a ClC chloride channel at 3.0 Å reveals the molecular basis of
anion selectivity. Nature 415, 287–294. doi: 10.1038/415287a
Duvernoy, H. M., Delon, S., and Vannson, J. L. (1981). Cortical blood vessels of the
human brain. Brain Res. Bull. 7, 519–579. doi: 10.1016/0361-9230(81)90007-1
Dyer, L. A., and Patterson, C. (2010). Development of the endothelium:
An emphasis on heterogeneity. Semin. Thromb. Hemost. 36, 227–235.
doi: 10.1055/s-0030-1253446
Earley, S., and Brayden, J. E. (2010). Transient receptor potential channels and
vascular function. Clin. Sci. 119, 19–36. doi: 10.1042/CS20090641
Earley, S., and Brayden, J. E. (2015). Transient receptor potential channels in the
vasculature. Physiol. Rev. 95, 645–690. doi: 10.1152/physrev.00026.2014
Eberth, C. (1871). Handbuch der lehre von der gewegen des menschen und der
tiere Vol. 1. Leipzig: Engelmann
Enkvetchakul, D., and Nichols, C. G. (2003). Gating mechanism of KATP
channels: function fits form. J. Gen. Physiol. 122, 471–480. doi: 10.1085/jgp.200
308878
Estévez, R., Pusch, M., Ferrer-Costa, C., Orozco, M., and Jentsch, T. J. (2004).
Functional and structural conservational of CBS domains from CLC chloride
channels. J. Physiol. 557, 363–378. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.2003.058453
Evans, N. J., Bayliss, A. L., Reale, V., and Evans, P. D. (2016). Characterisation
of signalling by the endogenous GPER1 (GPR30) receptor in an embryonic
mouse hippocampal cell line (mHippoE-18). PLoS ONE 11:e0152138.
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0152138
Fan, G., Baker, M. L., Wang, Z., Baker, M. R., Sinyagovskiy, P. A., Chiu, W.,
et al. (2015). Gating machinery of InsP3R channels revealed by electron
cryomicroscopy. Nature 527, 336–341. doi: 10.1038/nature15249
Fan, Z., and Makielski, J. C. (1997). Anionic phospholipids activate ATP-sensitive
potassium channels. J. Biol. Chem. 272, 5388–5395. doi: 10.1074/jbc.272.9.5388
Fernández-Klett, F., Offenhauser, N., Dirnagl, U., Priller, J., and Lindauer, U.
(2010). Pericytes in capillaries are contractile in vivo, but arterioles mediate
functional hyperemia in the mouse brain. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 107,
22290–22295. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1011321108
Fernández-Tenorio, M., Porras-González, C., Castellano, A., Del Valle-Rodríguez,
A., López-Barneo, J., and Ureña, J. (2011). Metabotropic regulation of
RhoA/Rho-associated kinase by L-type Ca2+ channels: new mechanism
for depolarization-evoked mammalian arterial contraction. Circ. Res. 108,
1348–1357. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.111.240127
Ferrandon, S., Feinstein, T. N., Castro, M., Wang, B., Bouley, R., Potts, J. T., et al.
(2009). Sustained cyclic AMP production by parathyroid hormone receptor
endocytosis. Nat. Chem. Biol. 5, 734–742. doi: 10.1038/nchembio.206
Ferris, C. D., Cameron, A. M., Bredt, D. S., Huganir, R. L., and Snyder, S. H.
(1991a). Inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor is phosphorylated by cyclic AMPdependent protein kinase at serines 1755 and 1589. Biochem. Biophys. Res.
Commun. 175, 192–198. doi: 10.1016/S0006-291X(05)81219-7
Ferris, C. D., Huganir, R. L., Bredt, D. S., Cameron, A. M., and Snyder,
S. H. (1991b). Inositol trisphosphate receptor: phosphorylation by
protein kinase C and calcium calmodulin-dependent protein kinases in
reconstituted lipid vesicles. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 88, 2232–2235.
doi: 10.1073/pnas.88.6.2232
Filosa, J. A., Bonev, A. D., Straub, S. V., Meredith, A. L., Wilkerson, M. K., Aldrich,
R. W., et al. (2006). Local potassium signaling couples neuronal activity to
vasodilation in the brain. Nat. Neurosci. 9, 1397–1403. doi: 10.1038/nn1779
Finch, E., Turner, T., and Goldin, S. (1991). Calcium as a coagonist of
inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate-induced calcium release. Science 252, 443–446.
doi: 10.1126/science.2017683
Findlay, I. (1987). The effects of magnesium upon adenosine triphosphatesensitive potassium channels in a rat insulin-secreting cell line. J. Physiol. 391,
611–629. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.1987.sp016759
Findlay, I. (1988). Effects of ADP upon the ATP-sensitive K+ channel in rat
ventricular myocytes. J. Membr. Biol. 101, 83–92. doi: 10.1007/BF01872823
Fisher, I., Jenkins, M. L., Tall, G. G., Burke, J. E., and Smrcka, A. V.
(2020). Activation of phospholipase C β by Gβγ and Gαq involves Cterminal rearrangement to release auto-inhibition. Structure 28, 1–10.
doi: 10.1101/810994
Foskett, J. K., White, C., Cheung, K. H., and Mak, D. O. (2007). Inositol
trisphosphate receptor Ca2+ release channels. Physiol. Rev. 87, 593–658.
doi: 10.1152/physrev.00035.2006
Foster, M. N., and Coetzee, W. A. (2015). KATP channels in the cardiovascular
system. Physiol. Rev. 96, 177–252. doi: 10.1152/physrev.00003.2015
Freeman, B. D., Machado, F. S., Tanowitz, H. B., and Desruisseaux, M. S. (2014).
Endothelin-1 and its role in the pathogenesis of infectious diseases. Life Sci. 118,
110–119. doi: 10.1016/j.lfs.2014.04.021
Fresco, P., Diniz, C., and Gonçalves, J. (2004). Facilitation of noradrenaline release
by activation of adenosine A2A receptors triggers both phospholipase C and
adenylate cyclase pathways in rat tail artery. Cardiovasc. Res. 63, 739–746.
doi: 10.1016/j.cardiores.2004.05.015
Friedrich, E. E., Hong, Z., Xiong, S., Zhong, M., Di, A., Rehman, J., et al.
(2019). Endothelial cell Piezo1 mediates pressure-induced lung vascular
hyperpermeability via disruption of adherens junctions. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 116, 12980–12985. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1902165116
Fujiwara, T., and Uehara, Y. (1984). The cytoarchitecture of the wall and
the innervation pattern of the microvessels in the rat mammary gland:
A scanning electron microscopic observation. Am. J. Anat. 170, 39–54.
doi: 10.1002/aja.1001700104
Fuller, M. D., Fu, Y., Scheuer, T., and Catterall, W. A. (2014). Differential
regulation of Cav1.2 channels by cAMP-dependent protein kinase bound to
A-kinase anchoring proteins 15 and 79/150. J. Gen. Physiol. 143, 315–324.
doi: 10.1085/jgp.201311075
Gannon, K. P., Vanlandingham, L. G., Jernigan, N. L., Grifoni, S. C., Hamilton,
G., and Drummond, H. A. (2008). Impaired pressure-induced constriction in
mouse middle cerebral arteries of ASIC2 knockout mice. Am. J. Physiol. Hear.
Circ. Physiol. 294, H1793–H1803. doi: 10.1152/ajpheart.01380.2007
Garcia, D. C. G., and Longden, T. A. (2020). “Ion channels in capillary
endothelium,” in Current Topics in Membranes. Ion Channels and Calcium
Signaling in the Microcirculation, ed W. F. Jackson (Cambridge, MA: Academic
Press), 261–300. doi: 10.1016/bs.ctm.2020.01.005
Giamarchi, A., and Delmas, P. (2007). “Activation mechanisms and functional
roles of TRPP2 cation channels,” in TRP Ion Channel Function in Sensory
Transduction and Cellular Signaling Cascades, eds W. Liedtke and S. Heller
(Boca Raton FL: CRC Press/Taylor & Francis).
Girouard, H., and Iadecola, C. (2006). Neurovascular coupling in the normal
brain and in hypertension, stroke, and Alzheimer disease. J. Appl. Physiol. 100,
328–335. doi: 10.1152/japplphysiol.00966.2005
Gonzales, A. L., Klug, N. R., Moshkforoush, A., Lee, J. C., Lee, F. K., Shui,
B., et al. (2020). Contractile pericytes determine the direction of blood
flow at capillary junctions. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 117, 27022–27033.
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1922755117
Gonzales, A. L., Yang, Y., Sullivan, M. N., Sanders, L., Dabertrand, F., HillEubanks, D. C., et al. (2014). A PLCγ1-dependent, force-sensitive signaling
network in the myogenic constriction of cerebral arteries. Sci. Signal. 7:ra49.
doi: 10.1126/scisignal.2004732
Gould, I. G., Tsai, P., Kleinfeld, D., and Linninger, A. (2017). The capillary
bed offers the largest hemodynamic resistance to the cortical blood
supply. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 37, 52–68. doi: 10.1177/0271678X166
71146
Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 36 December 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 601324
Hariharan et al. CNS Pericyte Ion Channels and GPCRs
Grant, R. I., Hartmann, D. A., Underly, R. G., Berthiaume, A. A., Bhat, N. R.,
and Shih, A. Y. (2019). Organizational hierarchy and structural diversity of
microvascular pericytes in adult mouse cortex. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 39,
411–425. doi: 10.1177/0271678X17732229
Gribble, F. M., Tucker, S. J., and Ashcroft, F. M. (1997). The essential role of
the walker A motifs of SUR1 in K-ATP channel activation by Mg-ADP and
diazoxide. EMBO J. 16, 1145–1152. doi: 10.1093/emboj/16.6.1145
Gribble, F. M., Tucker, S. J., Haug, T., and Ashcroft, F. M. (1998). MgATP activates
the β cell KATP channel by interaction with its SUR1 subunit. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U.S.A. 95, 7185–7190. doi: 10.1073/pnas.95.12.7185
Grimm, C., Kraft, R., Schultz, G., and Harteneck, C. (2005). Activation of
the melastatin-related cation channel TRPM3 by D-erythro-sphingosine
[Corrected]. Mol. Pharmacol. 67, 798–805. doi: 10.1124/mol.104.006734
Grubb, S., Cai, C., Hald, B. O., Khennouf, L., Murmu, R. P., Jensen, A. G. K., et al.
(2020). Precapillary sphincters maintain perfusion in the cerebral cortex. Nat.
Commun. 11:395. doi: 10.1038/s41467-020-14330-z
Grubb, S., Poulsen, K. A., Juul, C. A., Kyed, T., Klausen, T. K., Larsen, E. H.,
et al. (2013). TMEM16F (Anoctamin 6), an anion channel of delayed Ca2+
activation. J. Gen. Physiol. 141, 585–600. doi: 10.1085/jgp.201210861
Grutzendler, J., and Nedergaard, M. (2019). Cellular control of brain capillary
blood flow: in vivo imaging veritas. Trends Neurosci. 42, 528–536.
doi: 10.1016/j.tins.2019.05.009
Guimarães, S., and Moura, D. (2001). Vascular adrenoceptors: an update.
Pharmacol. Rev. 53, 319–356.
Gunaje, J. J., Bahrami, A. J., Schwartz, S. M., Daum, G., and Mahoney, W.
M. (2011). PDGF-dependent regulation of regulator of G protein signaling-5
expression and vascular smooth muscle cell functionality. Am. J. Physiol. Cell
Physiol. 301, C478–C489. doi: 10.1152/ajpcell.00348.2010
Gurney, A. M., Osipenko, O. N., MacMillan, D., McFarlane, K. M., Tate,
R. J., and Kempsill, F. E. J. (2003). Two-pore domain K channel, TASK1, in pulmonary artery smooth muscle cells. Circ. Res. 93, 957–964.
doi: 10.1161/01.RES.0000099883.68414.61
Haas, T. L., and Duling, B. R. (1997). Morphology favors an endothelial cell
pathway for longitudinal conduction within arterioles. Microvasc. Res. 53,
113–120. doi: 10.1006/mvre.1996.1999
Hall, C. N., Reynell, C., Gesslein, B., Hamilton, N. B., Mishra, A., Sutherland, B.
A., et al. (2014). Capillary pericytes regulate cerebral blood flow in health and
disease. Nature 508, 55–60. doi: 10.1038/nature13165
Hamada, K., Miyatake, H., Terauchi, A., and Mikoshiba, K. (2017). IP3-
mediated gating mechanism of the IP3 receptor revealed by mutagenesis
and X-ray crystallography. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 114, 4661–4666.
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1701420114
Hamel, E. (2006). Perivascular nerves and the regulation of cerebrovascular tone.
J. Appl. Physiol. 100, 1059–1064. doi: 10.1152/japplphysiol.00954.2005
Han, K., Min, J., Lee, M., Kang, B.-M., Park, T., Hahn, J., et al.
(2019). Neurovascular coupling under chronic stress is modified by
altered GABAergic interneuron activity. J. Neurosci. 39, 10081–10095.
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1357-19.2019
Hanlon, C. D., and Andrew, D. J. (2015). Outside-in signaling - a brief review of
GPCR signaling with a focus on the Drosophila GPCR family. J. Cell Sci. 128,
3533–3542. doi: 10.1242/jcs.175158
Hansen, S. B., Tao, X., and MacKinnon, R. (2011). Structural basis of PIP2
activation of the classical inward rectifier K+ channel Kir2.2. Nature 477,
495–498. doi: 10.1038/nature10370
Harden, T. K., Sesma, J. I., Fricks, I. P., and Lazarowski, E. R. (2010). Signalling and
pharmacological properties of the P2Y14 receptor. Acta Physiol. 199, 149–160.
doi: 10.1111/j.1748-1716.2010.02116.x
Harraz, O. F., Abd El-Rahman, R. R., Bigdely-Shamloo, K., Wilson, S.
M., Brett, S. E., Romero, M., et al. (2014). Cav3.2 channels and the
induction of negative feedback in cerebral arteries. Circ. Res. 115, 650–661.
doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.114.304056
Harraz, O. F., Hill-Eubanks, D., and Nelson, M. T. (2020). PIP2: a critical regulator
of vascular ion channels hiding in plain sight. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
doi: 10.1073/pnas.2006737117. [Epub ahead of print].
Harraz, O. F., Longden, T. A., Dabertrand, F., Hill-Eubanks, D., and
Nelson, M. T. (2018). Endothelial GqPCR activity controls capillary
electrical signaling and brain blood flow through PIP2 depletion. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 115, E3569–E3577. doi: 10.1073/pnas.18002
01115
Harraz, O. F., and Welsh, D. G. (2013). T-Type Ca2+ channels in cerebral arteries:
approaches, hypotheses, and speculation. Microcirculation 20, 299–306.
doi: 10.1111/micc.12038
Harrison, P. J., Lyon, L., Sartorius, L. J., Burnet, P. W. J., and Lane,
T. A. (2008). The group II metabotropic glutamate receptor 3
(mGluR3, mGlu3, GRM3): expression, function and involvement in
schizophrenia. J. Psychopharmacol. 22, 308–322. doi: 10.1177/02698811080
89818
Hartmann, D. A., Underly, R. G., Grant, R. I., Watson, A. N., Lindner, V.,
and Shih, A. Y. (2015). Pericyte structure and distribution in the cerebral
cortex revealed by high-resolution imaging of transgenic mice. Neurophotonics
2:041402. doi: 10.1117/1.NPh.2.4.041402
Hashitani, H., Mitsui, R., Miwa-Nishimura, K., and Lam, M. (2018). Role of
capillary pericytes in the integration of spontaneous Ca2+ transients in the
suburothelial microvasculature in situ of the mouse bladder. J. Physiol. 596,
3531–3552. doi: 10.1113/JP275845
He, L., Vanlandewijck, M., Mäe, M., Andrae, J., Ando, K., Gaudio, F., et al. (2018).
Single cell RNAseq of mouse brain and lung vascular and vessel-associated cell
types. Sci. Data 5:180160. doi: 10.1038/sdata.2018.160
Heinze, C., Seniuk, A., Sokolov, M. V., Huebner, A. K., Klementowicz, A.
E., Szijárt,ó, I. A., et al. (2014). Disruption of vascular Ca2+-activated
chloride currents lowers blood pressure. J. Clin. Invest. 124, 675–686.
doi: 10.1172/JCI70025
Helton, T. D., Xu, W., and Lipscombe, D. (2005). Neuronal L-type calcium
channels open quickly and are inhibited slowly. J. Neurosci. 25, 10247–10251.
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1089-05.2005
Henno, P., Grassin-Delyle, S., Belle, E., Brollo, M., Naline, E., Sage, E.,
et al. (2017). In smokers, Sonic hedgehog modulates pulmonary endothelial
function through vascular endothelial growth factor. Respir. Res. 18:102.
doi: 10.1186/s12931-017-0590-1
Hepler, J. R., Berman, D. M., Gilman, A. G., and Kozasa, T. (1997). RGS4
and GAIP are GTPase-activating proteins for Gqα and block activation
of phospholipase Cβ by γ-thio-GTP-Gqα. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 94,
428–432. doi: 10.1073/pnas.94.2.428
Hibino, H., Inanobe, A., Furutani, K., Murakami, S., Findlay, I., and Kurachi, Y.
(2010). Inwardly rectifying potassium channels: their structure, function, and
physiological roles. Physiol. Rev. 90, 291–366. doi: 10.1152/physrev.00021.2009
Hieble, J. P., and Ruffolo, R. R. Jr. (1997). Recent advances in the identification
of α1- and α2-adrenoceptor subtypes: therapeutic implications. Expert Opin.
Investig. Drugs 6, 367–387. doi: 10.1517/13543784.6.4.367
Hill, R. A., Tong, L., Yuan, P., Murikinati, S., Gupta, S., and Grutzendler, J. (2015).
Regional blood flow in the normal and ischemic brain is controlled by arteriolar
smooth muscle cell contractility and not by capillary pericytes. Neuron 87,
95–110. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2015.06.001
Hille, B., Dickson, E. J., Kruse, M., Vivas, O., and Suh, B. C. (2015).
Phosphoinositides regulate ion channels. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1851, 844–856.
doi: 10.1016/j.bbalip.2014.09.010
Hill-Eubanks, D. C., Gonzales, A. L., Sonkusare, S. K., and Nelson, M. T. (2014).
Vascular TRP channels: performing under pressure and going with the flow.
Physiology 29, 343–360. doi: 10.1152/physiol.00009.2014
Hill-Eubanks, D. C., Werner, M. E., Heppner, T. J., and Nelson, M. T. (2011).
Calcium signaling in smooth muscle. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Biol.
3:a004549. doi: 10.1101/cshperspect.a004549
Hofmann, T., Obukhov, A. G., Schaefer, M., Harteneck, C., Gudermann, T., and
Schultz, G. (1999). Direct activation of human TRPC6 and TRPC3 channels by
diacylglycerol. Nature 397, 259–263. doi: 10.1038/16711
Horinouchi, T., Terada, K., Higashi, T., and Miwa, S. (2013). Endothelin receptor
signaling: new insight into its regulatory mechanisms. J. Pharmacol. Sci. 123,
85–101. doi: 10.1254/jphs.13R02CR
Hot, B., Valnohova, J., Arthofer, E., Simon, K., Shin, J., Uhlén, M., et al. (2017).
FZD10-Gα13 signalling axis points to a role of FZD10 in CNS angiogenesis. Cell.
Signal. 32, 93–103. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2017.01.023
Hu, C., DePuy, S. D., Yao, J., McIntire, W. E., and Barrett, P. Q. (2009). Protein
kinase A activity controls the regulation of T-type Cav3.2 channels by Gβγ
dimers. J. Biol. Chem. 284, 7465–7473. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M808049200
Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 37 December 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 601324
Hariharan et al. CNS Pericyte Ion Channels and GPCRs
Hu, Y., and Wilson, G. S. (1997). Rapid changes in local extracellular rat brain
glucose observed with an in vivo glucose sensor. J. Neurochem. 68, 1745–1752.
doi: 10.1046/j.1471-4159.1997.68041745.x
Huang, C., Hepler, J. R., Gilman, A. G., and Mumby, S. M. (1997). Attenuation of
Gi- and Gq-mediated signaling by expression of RGS4 or GAIP in mammalian
cells. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 94, 6159–6163. doi: 10.1073/pnas.94.12.6159
Huang, G. N., Zeng, W., Kim, J. Y., Yuan, J. P., Han, L., Muallem, S., et al. (2006).
STIM1 carboxyl-terminus activates native SOC, Icrac and TRPC1 channels. Nat.
Cell Biol. 8, 1003–1010. doi: 10.1038/ncb1454
Huang, J., Zhou, H., Mahavadi, S., Sriwai, W., and Murthy, K. S. (2007).
Inhibition of Gαq-dependent PLC-β1 activity by PKG and PKA is mediated
by phosphorylation of RGS4 and GRK2. Am. J. Physiol. Cell Physiol. 292,
C200–C208. doi: 10.1152/ajpcell.00103.2006
Huang, Y., and Thathiah, A. (2015). Regulation of neuronal communication
by G protein-coupled receptors. FEBS Lett. 589, 1607–1619.
doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2015.05.007
Hübner, C. A., and Jentsch, T. J. (2002). Ion channel diseases. Hum. Mol. Genet.
11, 2435–2445. doi: 10.1093/hmg/11.20.2435
Huneau, C., Houot, M., Joutel, A., Béranger, B., Giroux, C., Benali, H., et al. (2018).
Altered dynamics of neurovascular coupling in cadasil. Ann. Clin. Transl.
Neurol. 5, 788–802. doi: 10.1002/acn3.574
Iadecola, C. (2004). Neurovascular regulation in the normal brain and in
Alzheimer’s disease. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 5, 347–360. doi: 10.1038/nrn1387
Iadecola, C. (2017). The neurovascular unit coming of age: a journey
through neurovascular coupling in health and disease. Neuron 96, 17–42.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2017.07.030
Iftinca, M. C., and Zamponi, G. W. (2009). Regulation of neuronal T-type calcium
channels. Trends Pharmacol. Sci. 30, 32–40. doi: 10.1016/j.tips.2008.10.004
Iino, M. (1990). Biphasic Ca2+ dependence of inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate-induced
Ca release in smooth muscle cells of the guinea pig taenia caeci. J. Gen. Physiol.
95, 1103–1122. doi: 10.1085/jgp.95.6.1103
Inada, H., Kawabata, F., Ishimaru, Y., Fushiki, T., Matsunami, H., and Tominaga,
M. (2008). Off-response property of an acid-activated cation channel complex
PKD1L3-PKD2L1. EMBO Rep. 9, 690–697. doi: 10.1038/embor.2008.89
Ishizaki, E., Fukumoto, M., and Puro, D. G. (2009). Functional KATP channels in
the rat retinal microvasculature: topographical distribution, redox regulation,
spermine modulation and diabetic alteration. J. Physiol. 587, 2233–2253.
doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.2009.169003
Iturria-Medina, Y., Sotero, R. C., Toussaint, P. J., Mateos-Pérez, J. M., Evans,
A. C., and Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (2016). Early role of
vascular dysregulation on late-onset Alzheimer’s disease based on multifactorial
data-driven analysis. Nat. Commun. 21:11934. doi: 10.1038/ncomms11934
Iwai, M., Michikawa, T., Bosanac, I., Ikura, M., and Mikoshiba, K. (2007).
Molecular basis of the isoform-specific ligand-binding affinity of
inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptors. J. Biol. Chem. 282, 12755–12764.
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M609833200
Jackson, W. F. (2018). Kv channels and the regulation of vascular smooth muscle
tone. Microcirculation 25:e12421. doi: 10.1111/micc.12421
Jacobson, K. A., and Gao, Z. G. (2006). Adenosine receptors as therapeutic targets.
Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 5, 247–264. doi: 10.1038/nrd1983
Janiurek, M. M., Soylu-Kucharz, R., Christoffersen, C., Kucharz, K., and
Lauritzen, M. (2019). Apolipoprotein M-bound sphingosine-1-phosphate
regulates blood–brain barrier paracellular permeability and transcytosis. Elife
8:e49405. doi: 10.1101/684894
Jentsch, T. J., Friedrich, T., Schriever, A., and Yamada, H. (1999). The CLC chloride
channel family. Pflügers Arch. 437, 783–795. doi: 10.1007/s004240050847
Jentsch, T. J., Stein, V., Weinreich, F., and Zdebik, A. A. (2002). Molecular
structure and physiological function of chloride channels. Physiol. Rev. 82,
503–568. doi: 10.1152/physrev.00029.2001
Jeon, J. P., Hong, C., Park, E. J., Jeon, J. H., Cho, N. H., Kim, I. G., et al. (2012).
Selective Gαi subunits as novel direct activators of transient receptor potential
canonical (TRPC)4 and TRPC5 channels. J. Biol. Chem. 287, 17029–17039.
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.326553
Jiang, Y., Lee, A., Chen, J., Ruta, V., Cadene, M., Chait, B. T., et al. (2003).
X-ray structure of a voltage-dependent K+ channel. Nature 423, 33–41.
doi: 10.1038/nature01580
Jiao, J., Garg, V., Yang, B., Elton, T. S., and Hu, K. (2008). Protein kinase
C-ε; induces caveolin-dependent internalization of vascular adenosine
5
′
-triphosphate-sensitive K+ channels. Hypertension 52, 499–506.
doi: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.108.110817
Jin, X., Shah, S., Liu, Y., Zhang, H., Lees, M., Fu, Z., et al. (2013). Activation
of the Cl− channel ANO1 by localized calcium signals in nociceptive
sensory neurons requires coupling with the IP3 receptor. Sci. Signal. 6, ra73.
doi: 10.1126/scisignal.2004184
Johnson, G. C., Parsons, R., May, V., and Hammack, S. E. (2020). The
role of pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating polypeptide (PACAP)
signaling in the hippocampal dentate gyrus. Front. Cell. Neurosci. 14:111.
doi: 10.3389/fncel.2020.00111
Jones, S. V. P. (2003). Role of the small GTPase Rho in modulation of the
inwardly rectifying potassium channel Kir2.1. Mol. Pharmacol. 64, 987–993.
doi: 10.1124/mol.64.4.987
Kach, J., Sethakorn, N., and Dulin, N. O. (2012). A finer tuning of G-protein
signaling through regulated control of RGS proteins. Am. J. Physiol. Hear. Circ.
Physiol. 303, H19–H35. doi: 10.1152/ajpheart.00764.2011
Kaczynski, P., Kowalewski, M. P., and Waclawik, A. (2016). Prostaglandin F2α
promotes angiogenesis and embryo-maternal interactions during implantation.
Reproduction 151, 539–552. doi: 10.1530/REP-15-0496
Kajioka, S., Kitamura, K., and Kuriyama, H. (1991). Guanosine diphosphate
activates an adenosine 5’-triphosphate-sensitive K+ channel in the rabbit portal
vein. J. Physiol. 444, 397–418. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.1991.sp018885
Kamouchi, M., and Kitamura, K. (1994). Regulation of ATP-sensitive K+ channels
by ATP and nucleotide diphosphate in rabbit portal vein. Am. J. Physiol. Hear.
Circ. Physiol. 266, H1687–H1698. doi: 10.1152/ajpheart.1994.266.5.H1687
Kamp, T. J., and Hell, J. W. (2000). Regulation of Cardiac L-type calcium
channels by protein kinase A and protein kinase C. Circ. Res. 87, 1095–1102.
doi: 10.1161/01.RES.87.12.1095
Kapusta, D. R., Dayan, L. A., and Kenigs, V. A. (2002). Nociceptin/orphanin
FQ modulates the cardiovascular, but not renal, responses to stress in
spontaneously hypertensive rats. Clin. Exp. Pharmacol. Physiol. 29, 254–259.
doi: 10.1046/j.1440-1681.2002.03639.x
Katritch, V., Fenalti, G., Abola, E. E., Roth, B. L., Cherezov, V., and Stevens, R. C.
(2014). Allosteric sodium in class A GPCR signaling. Trends Biochem. Sci. 39,
233–244. doi: 10.1016/j.tibs.2014.03.002
Katz, B. (1949). Les constantes electriques de la membrane du muscle. Arch. Sci.
Physiol. 3, 285–299.
Kawamura, H., Sugiyama, T., Wu, D. M., Kobayashi, M., Yamanishi, S.,
Katsumura, K., et al. (2003). ATP: a vasoactive signal in the pericytecontaining microvasculature of the rat retina. J. Physiol. 551, 787–799.
doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.2003.047977
Kawamura, H., Oku, H., Li, Q., Sakagami, K., and Puro, D. G. (2002). Endothelininduced changes in the physiology of retinal pericytes. Invest. Opthalmol. Vis.
Sci. 43, 882–888. Available online at: https://iovs.arvojournals.org/article.aspx?
articleid=2200149
Kawate, T., Michel, J. C., Birdsong, W. T., and Gouaux, E. (2009). Crystal structure
of the ATP-gated P2X4 ion channel in the closed state. Nature 460, 592–598.
doi: 10.1038/nature08198
Kennedy, A. J., Yang, P., Read, C., Kuc, R. E., Yang, L., Taylor, E. J. A., et al.
(2016). Chemerin elicits potent constrictor actions via chemokine-like receptor
1 (CMKLR1), not G-protein-coupled receptor 1 (GPR1), in human and rat
vasculature. J. Am. Heart Assoc. 5:e004421. doi: 10.1161/JAHA.116.004421
Kerage, D., Brindley, D. N., and Hemmings, D. G. (2014). Review: Novel insights
into the regulation of vascular tone by sphingosine 1-phosphate. Placenta 35,
S86–S92. doi: 10.1016/j.placenta.2013.12.006
Khakh, B. S., Burnstock, G., Kennedy, C., King, B. F., North, R. A., Séguéla, P.,
et al. (2001). International union of pharmacology. XXIV. Current status of the
nomenclature and properties of P2X receptors and their subunits. Pharmacol.
Rev. 53, 107–118.
Khan, S. M., Sung, J. Y., and Hébert, T. E. (2016). Gβγ subunits—different spaces,
different faces. Pharmacol. Res. 111, 434–441. doi: 10.1016/j.phrs.2016.06.026
Kilander, M. B. C., Petersen, J., Andressen, K. W., Ganji, R. S., Levy, F. O., Schuster,
J., et al. (2014). Disheveled regulates precoupling of heterotrimeric G proteins
to Frizzled 6. FASEB J. 28, 2293–2305. doi: 10.1096/fj.13-246363
Kim, K. S., Jang, J. H., Lin, H., Choi, S. W., Kim, H. R., Shin, D. H., et al.
(2015). Rise and fall of Kir2.2 current by TLR4 signaling in human monocytes:
PKC-dependent trafficking and PI3K-mediated PIP2 decrease. J. Immunol. 195,
3345–3354. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1500056
Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 38 December 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 601324
Hariharan et al. CNS Pericyte Ion Channels and GPCRs
Kisler, K., Nelson, A. R., Rege, S. V., Ramanathan, A., Wang, Y., Ahuja, A., et al.
(2017). Pericyte degeneration leads to neurovascular uncoupling and limits
oxygen supply to brain. Nat. Neurosci. 20, 406–441. doi: 10.1038/nn.4489
Kitamura, K., and Yamazaki, J. (2001). Chloride channels and their functional
roles in smooth muscle tone in the vasculature. Jpn. J. Pharmacol. 85, 351–357.
doi: 10.1254/jjp.85.351
Kleppisch, T., and Nelson, M. T. (1995). Adenosine activates ATP-sensitive
potassium channels in arterial myocytes via A2 receptors and cAMPdependent protein kinase. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 92, 12441–12445.
doi: 10.1073/pnas.92.26.12441
Ko, K. R., Ngai, A. C., and Winn, H. R. (1990). Role of adenosine in regulation
of regional cerebral blood flow in sensory cortex. Am. J. Physiol. Hear. Circ.
Physiol. 259, H1703-H1708. doi: 10.1152/ajpheart.1990.259.6.H1703
Kochukov, M. Y., Balasubramanian, A., Abramowitz, J., Birnbaumer, L., and
Marrelli, S. P. (2014). Activation of endothelial transient receptor potential C3
channel is required for small conductance calcium-activated potassium channel
activation and sustained endothelial hyperpolarization and vasodilation of
cerebral artery. J. Am. Heart Assoc. 3:e000913. doi: 10.1161/JAHA.114.
000913
Kofuji, P., and Newman, E. A. (2004). Potassium buffering in the central nervous
system. Neuroscience 129, 1045–1056. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2004.06.008
Koide, M., Bonev, A. D., Nelson, M. T., and Wellman, G. C. (2012). Inversion of
neurovascular coupling by subarachnoid blood depends on large-conductance
Ca2+-activated K+ (BK) channels. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 109, E1387–
E1395. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1121359109
Koide, M., Syed, A. U., Braas, K. M., May, V., and Wellman, G. C.
(2014). Pituitary adenylate cyclase activating polypeptide (PACAP) dilates
cerebellar arteries through activation of large-conductance Ca2+-activated
(BK) and ATP-sensitive (KATP) K+ channels. J. Mol. Neurosci. 54, 443–450.
doi: 10.1007/s12031-014-0301-z
Koide, M., Moshkforoush, A., Tsoukias, N. M., Hill-Eubanks, D. C., Wellman, G.
C., Nelson, M. T., et al. (2018). The yin and yang of Kv channels in cerebral
small vessel pathologies. Microcirculation 25, 1–10. doi: 10.1111/micc.12436
Kovacs, R. J., and Nelson, M. T. (1991). ATP-sensitive K+ channels from aortic
smooth muscle incorporated into planar lipid bilayers. Am. J. Physiol. Hear.
Circ. Physiol. 261, H604–H609. doi: 10.1152/ajpheart.1991.261.2.H604
Kovacs-Oller, T., Ivanova, E., Bianchimano, P., and Sagdullaev, B. T. (2020). The
pericyte connectome: spatial precision of neurovascular coupling is driven by
selective connectivity maps of pericytes and endothelial cells and is disrupted
in diabetes. Cell Discov. 6:39. doi: 10.1038/s41421-020-0180-0
Koval, M., Molina, S. A., and Burt, J. M. (2014). Mix and match: investigating
heteromeric and heterotypic gap junction channels in model systems and native
tissues. FEBS Lett. 588, 1193–1204. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2014.02.025
Kozielewicz, P., Turku, A., and Schulte, G. (2020). Molecular pharmacology of class
F receptor activation. Mol. Pharmacol. 97, 62–71. doi: 10.1124/mol.119.117986
Ksiazek, M., Chacinska, M., Chabowski, A., and Baranowski, M. (2015). Sources, ´
metabolism, and regulation of circulating sphingosine-1-phosphate. J. Lipid
Res. 56, 1271–1281. doi: 10.1194/jlr.R059543
Kurz, H. (2009). Cell lineages and early patterns of embryonic CNS vascularization.
Cell Adhes. Migr. 3, 205–210. doi: 10.4161/cam.3.2.7855
Lacroix, A., Toussay, X., Anenberg, E., Lecrux, C., Ferreirós, N., Karagiannis, A.,
et al. (2015). COX-2-derived prostaglandin E2 produced by pyramidal neurons
contributes to neurovascular coupling in the rodent cerebral cortex. J. Neurosci.
35, 11791–11810. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0651-15.2015
Lagerström, M. C., and Schiöth, H. B. (2008). Structural diversity of G protein
coupled receptors and significance for drug discovery. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov.
7, 339–357. doi: 10.1038/nrd2518
Lazarowski, E. (2006). Regulated release of nucleotides and UDP
sugars from astrocytoma cells. Novartis Found. Symp. 276, 73–84.
doi: 10.1002/9780470032244.ch7
Lazarowski, E. R. (2012). Vesicular and conductive mechanisms of nucleotide
release. Purinergic Signal. 8, 359–373. doi: 10.1007/s11302-012-9304-9
Lazarowski, E. R., and Harden, T. K. (2015). UDP-sugars as extracellular signaling
molecules: cellular and physiologic consequences of P2Y14 receptor activation.
Mol. Pharmacol. 88, 151–160. doi: 10.1124/mol.115.098756
Ledoux, J., Werner, M. E., Brayden, J. E., and Nelson, M. T. (2006). Calciumactivated potassium channels and the regulation of vascular tone. Physiology
21, 69–78. doi: 10.1152/physiol.00040.2005
Lee, A., Scheuer, T., and Catterall, W. A. (2000). Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent
facilitation and inactivation of P/Q-type Ca2+ channels. J. Neurosci. 20,
6830–6838. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.20-18-06830.2000
Lee, A., Wong, S. T., Gallagher, D., Li, B., Storm, D. R., Scheuer, T., et al. (1999).
Ca2+/calmodulin binds to and modulates P/Q-type calcium channels. Nature
399, 155–159. doi: 10.1038/20194
Lee-Kwon, W., Goo, J. H., Zhang, Z., Silldorff, E. P., and Pallone, T. L. (2007).
Vasa recta voltage-gated Na+ channel Nav1.3 is regulated by calmodulin. Am.
J. Physiol. Ren. Physiol. 292, F404–F414. doi: 10.1152/ajprenal.00070.2006
Lefkimmiatis, K., and Zaccolo, M. (2014). cAMP signaling in
subcellular compartments. Pharmacol. Ther. 143, 295–304.
doi: 10.1016/j.pharmthera.2014.03.008
Leloir, L. F., Olavarría, J. M., Goldemberg, S. H., and Carminatti, H. (1959).
Biosynthesis of glycogen from uridine diphosphate glucose. Arch. Biochem.
Biophys. 81, 508–520. doi: 10.1016/0003-9861(59)90232-2
Li, B., and Freeman, R. D. (2015). Neurometabolic coupling between neural
activity, glucose and lactate in activated visual cortex. J. Neurochem. 135,
742–754. doi: 10.1111/jnc.13143
Li, J., Hou, B., Tumova, S., Muraki, K., Bruns, A., Ludlow, M. J., et al. (2014).
Piezo1 integration of vascular architecture with physiological force. Nature 515,
279–282. doi: 10.1038/nature13701
Li, M., van Esch, B. C. A. M., Henricks, P. A. J., Folkerts, G., and Garssen,
J. (2018). The anti-inflammatory effects of short chain fatty acids on
lipopolysaccharide- or tumor necrosis factor α-stimulated endothelial cells via
activation of GPR41/43 and inhibition of HDACs. Front. Pharmacol. 9:533.
doi: 10.3389/fphar.2018.00533
Li, N., Wu, J. X., Ding, D., Cheng, J., Gao, N., and Chen, L. (2017).
Structure of a pancreatic ATP-sensitive potassium channel. Cell 168, 101–110.
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2016.12.028
Li, Q., and Puro, D. G. (2001). Adenosine activates ATP-sensitive K+ currents in
pericytes of rat retinal microvessels: role of A1 and A2a receptors. Brain Res.
907, 93–99. doi: 10.1016/S0006-8993(01)02607-5
Li, Y., Wang, F., Zhang, X., Qi, Z., Tang, M., Szeto, C., et al. (2012). β-adrenergic
stimulation increases Cav3.1 activity in cardiac myocytes through protein
kinase A. PLoS ONE 7:e39965. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0039965
Li, Z., Zhang, W., and Mulholland, M. W. (2015). LGR4 and its role
in intestinal protection and energy metabolism. Front. Endocrinol. 6:131.
doi: 10.3389/fendo.2015.00131
Lin, H., Pallone, T. L., and Cao, C. (2010). Murine vasa recta pericyte
chloride conductance is controlled by calcium, depolarization, and kinase
activity. Am. J. Physiol. Regul. Integr. Comp. Physiol. 299, R1317–R1325.
doi: 10.1152/ajpregu.00129.2010
Lintschinger, B., Balzer-Geldsetzer, M., Baskaran, T., Graier, W. F., Christoph,
R., Zhu, M. X., et al. (2000). Coassembly of Trp1 and Trp3 proteins
generates diacylglycerol- and Ca2+-sensitive cation channels. J. Biol. Chem. 275,
27799–27805. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M002705200
Lipscombe, D., Helton, T. D., and Xu, W. (2004). L-type calcium channels: the low
down. J. Neurophysiol. 92, 2633–2641. doi: 10.1152/jn.00486.2004
Liu, G., Papa, A., Katchman, A. N., Zakharov, S. I., Roybal, D., Hennessey, J.
A., et al. (2020). Mechanism of adrenergic Cav1.2 stimulation revealed by
proximity proteomics. Nature 577, 695–700. doi: 10.1038/s41586-020-1947-z
Liu, H., Enyeart, J. A., and Enyeart, J. J. (2010). ACTH induces Cav3.2 current
and mRNA by cAMP-dependent and cAMP-independent mechanisms. J. Biol.
Chem. 285, 20040–20050. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.104190
Liu, Y., Beyer, A., and Aebersold, R. (2016). On the dependency of cellular
protein levels on mRNA abundance. Cell 165, 535–550. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2016.
03.014
Liu, Y., Zhang, Z., Wang, Y., Song, J., Ma, K., Si, J., et al. (2018).
Electrophysiological properties of strial pericytes and the effect of
aspirin on pericyte K+ channels. Mol. Med. Rep. 17, 2861–2868.
doi: 10.3892/mmr.2017.8194
Lock, J. T., and Parker, I. (2020). IP3 mediated global Ca2+ signals arise through
two temporally and spatially distinct modes of Ca2+ release. Elife 9:e55008.
doi: 10.7554/eLife.55008.sa2
Lolicato, M., Riegelhaupt, P. M., Arrigoni, C., Clark, K. A., and Minor Jr., D. L.
(2014). Transmembrane helix straightening and buckling underlies activation
of mechanosensitive and thermosensitive K2P channels. Neuron 84, 1198–1212.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2014.11.017
Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 39 December 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 601324
Hariharan et al. CNS Pericyte Ion Channels and GPCRs
Longden, T., Harraz, O., Hennig, G., Shui, B., Lee, F., Lee, J., et al.
(2019). Neural activity drives dynamic Ca2+ signals in capillary
endothelial cells that shape local brain blood flow. FASEB J. 33:688.
doi: 10.1096/fasebj.2019.33.1_supplement.688.8
Longden, T. A., Dabertrand, F., Hill-Eubanks, D. C., Hammack, S. E., and
Nelson, M. T. (2014). Stress-induced glucocorticoid signaling remodels
neurovascular coupling through impairment of cerebrovascular inwardly
rectifying K+ channel function. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 111, 7462–7467.
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1401811111
Longden, T. A., Dabertrand, F., Koide, M., Gonzales, A. L., Tykocki, N.
R., Brayden, J. E., et al. (2017). Capillary K+-sensing initiates retrograde
hyperpolarization to locally increase cerebral blood flow. Nat. Neurosci. 20,
717–726. doi: 10.1038/nn.4533
Longden, T. A., Hill-Eubanks, D. C., and Nelson, M. T. (2016). Ion channel
networks in the control of cerebral blood flow. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 36,
492–512. doi: 10.1177/0271678X15616138
Longden, T. A., and Nelson, M. T. (2015). Vascular inward rectifier K+ channels as
external K+ sensors in the control of cerebral blood flow. Microcirculation 22,
183–196. doi: 10.1111/micc.12190
Luvisetto, S., Fellin, T., Spagnolo, M., Hivert, B., Brust, P. F., Harpold, M. M., et al.
(2004). Modal gating of human Cav2.1 (P/Q-type) calcium channels: I. The slow
and the fast gating modes and their modulation by β subunits. J. Gen. Physiol.
124, 445–461. doi: 10.1085/jgp.200409034
Ma, L., and Dorling, A. (2012). The roles of thrombin and proteaseactivated receptors in inflammation. Semin. Immunopathol. 34, 63–72.
doi: 10.1007/s00281-011-0281-9
MacDonald, B., Tamai, K., and He, X. (2009). Wnt/beta-catenin
signaling: components, mechanisms, and diseases. Dev. Cell 17, 9–26.
doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2009.06.016
MacDonald, P. E., Joseph, J. W., and Rorsman, P. (2005). Glucose-sensing
mechanisms in pancreatic β-cells. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London. Ser. B, Biol.
Sci. 360, 2211–2225. doi: 10.1098/rstb.2005.1762
Maguire, J. J., and Davenport, A. P. (2015). Endothelin
receptors and their antagonists. Semin. Nephrol. 35, 125–136.
doi: 10.1016/j.semnephrol.2015.02.002
Mahapatra, S., Marcantoni, A., Zuccotti, A., Carabelli, V., and Carbone, E. (2012).
Equal sensitivity of Cav1.2 and Cav1.3 channels to the opposing modulations
of PKA and PKG in mouse chromaffin cells. J. Physiol. 590, 5053–5073.
doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.2012.236729
Mahon, M. J. (2012). The parathyroid hormone receptorsome and the
potential for therapeutic intervention. Curr. Drug Targets 13, 116–128.
doi: 10.2174/138945012798868416
Makani, S., and Chesler, M. (2010). Rapid rise of extracellular pH evoked by neural
activity is generated by the plasma membrane calcium ATPase. J. Neurophysiol.
103, 667–676. doi: 10.1152/jn.00948.2009
Mani, B. K., Robakowski, C., Brueggemann, L. I., Cribbs, L. L., Tripathi, A.,
Majetschak, M., et al. (2016). Kv7.5 potassium channel subunits are the primary
targets for PKA-Dependent enhancement of vascular smooth muscle Kv7
currents. Mol. Pharmacol. 89, 323–334. doi: 10.1124/mol.115.101758
Markworth, E., Schwanstecher, C., and Schwanstecher, M. (2000). ATP4-
mediates closure of pancreatic beta-cell ATP-sensitive potassium channels
by interaction with 1 of 4 identical sites. Diabetes 49, 1413–1418.
doi: 10.2337/diabetes.49.9.1413
Masago, K., Kihara, Y., Yanagida, K., Hamano, F., Nakagawa, S., Niwa, M.,
et al. (2018). Lysophosphatidic acid receptor, LPA6, regulates endothelial
blood-brain barrier function: implication for hepatic encephalopathy. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 501, 1048–1054. doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2018.05.106
Mathew, R. J., Wilson, W. H., Tant, S. R., Robinson, L., and Prakash,
R. (1988). Abnormal resting regional cerebral blood flow patterns and
their correlates in schizophrenia. Arch. Gen. Psychiatry 45, 542–549.
doi: 10.1001/archpsyc.1988.01800300038004
Mathiisen, T. M., Lehre, K. P., Danbolt, N. C., and Ottersen, O. P. (2010).
The perivascular astroglial sheath provides a complete covering of the brain
microvessels: an electron microscopic 3D reconstruction. Glia 58, 1094–1103.
doi: 10.1002/glia.20990
Matsushita, K., Fukumoto, M., Kobayashi, T., Kobayashi, M., Ishizaki, E.,
Minami, M., et al. (2010). Diabetes-induced inhibition of voltage-dependent
calcium channels in the retinal microvasculature: role of spermine. Investig.
Opthalmology Vis. Sci. 51, 5979–5990. doi: 10.1167/iovs.10-5377
Matsushita, K., and Puro, D. G. (2006). Topographical heterogeneity of Kir
currents in pericyte-containing microvessels of the rat retina: effect of diabetes.
J. Physiol. 573, 483–495. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.2006.107102
Maudsley, S., Martin, B., and Luttrell, L. M. (2005). The origins of diversity and
specificity in G protein-coupled receptor signaling. J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther.
314, 485–494. doi: 10.1124/jpet.105.083121
May, V., Lutz, E., MacKenzie, C., Schutz, K. C., Dozark, K., and Braas, K. M. (2010).
Pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating polypeptide (PACAP)/PAC 1HOP1
receptor activation coordinates multiple neurotrophic signaling pathways: akt
activation through phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase γ and vesicle endocytosis for
neuronal survival. J. Biol. Chem. 285, 9749–9761. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.043117
Mayor, S., and Pagano, R. E. (2007). Pathways of clathrin-independent endocytosis.
Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 8, 603–612. doi: 10.1038/nrm2216
Mazzotti, C., Gagliostro, V, Bosisio, D., Del Prete, A., Tiberio, L., Thelen, M. M.,
et al. (2017). The atypical receptor CCRL2 (C-C Chemokine Receptor-Like 2)
does not act as a decoy receptor in endothelial cells. Front. Immunol. 8:1233.
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2017.01233
McGrory, S., Ballerini, L., Doubal, F. N., Staals, J., Allerhand, M., ValdesHernandez, M., et al. (2019). Retinal microvasculature and cerebral small vessel
disease in the lothian birth cohort 1936 and mild stroke study. Sci. Rep. 9:6320.
doi: 10.1038/s41598-019-42534-x
Means, C. K., and Brown, J. H. (2009). Sphingosine-1-phosphate receptor
signalling in the heart. Cardiovasc. Res. 82, 193–200. doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvp086
Mehta, D., Ahmmed, G. U., Paria, B. C., Holinstat, M., Voyno-Yasenetskaya, T.,
Tiruppathi, C., et al. (2003). RhoA interaction with inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate
receptor and transient receptor potential channel-1 regulates Ca2+ entry:
role in signaling increased endothelial permeability. J. Biol. Chem. 278,
33492–33500. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M302401200
Mestre, H., Tithof, J., Du, T., Song, W., Peng, W., Sweeney, A. M., et al. (2018).
Flow of cerebrospinal fluid is driven by arterial pulsations and is reduced in
hypertension. Nat. Commun. 9:4878. doi: 10.1038/s41467-018-07318-3
Miki, T., Liss, B., Minami, K., Shiuchi, T., Saraya, A., Kashima, Y., et al.
(2001). ATP-sensitive K+ channels in the hypothalamus are essential
for the maintenance of glucose homeostasis. Nat. Neurosci. 4, 507–512.
doi: 10.1038/87455
Mikoshiba, K. (2015). Role of IP3 receptor signaling in cell functions and diseases.
Adv. Biol. Regul. 57, 217–227. doi: 10.1016/j.jbior.2014.10.001
Miller, A. N., and Long, S. B. (2012). Crystal structure of the human
two-pore domain potassium channel K2P1. Science 335, 432–436.
doi: 10.1126/science.1213274
Mironov, S. L., and Skorova, E. Y. (2011). Stimulation of bursting in preBötzinger neurons by Epac through calcium release and modulation
of TRPM4 and K-ATP channels. J. Neurochem. 117, 295–308.
doi: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2011.07202.x
Mishra, A., Reynolds, J. P., Chen, Y., Gourine, A. V., Rusakov, D. A., and Attwell,
D. (2016). Astrocytes mediate neurovascular signaling to capillary pericytes but
not to arterioles. Nat. Neurosci. 19, 1619–1627. doi: 10.1038/nn.4428
Miyata, N., and Roman, R. J. (2005). Role of 20-hydroxyeicosatetraenoic
acid (20-HETE) in vascular system. J. Smooth Muscle Res. 41, 175–193.
doi: 10.1540/jsmr.41.175
Mogi, M., and Horiuchi, M. (2011). Neurovascular coupling in cognitive
impairment associated with diabetes mellitus. Circ. J. 75, 1042–1048.
doi: 10.1253/circj.CJ-11-0121
Muraki, K., Iwata, Y., Katanosaka, Y., Ito, T., Ohya, S., Shigekawa,
M., et al. (2003). TRPV2 is a component of osmotically sensitive
cation channels in murine aortic myocytes. Circ. Res. 93, 829–838.
doi: 10.1161/01.RES.0000097263.10220.0C
Muszkat, M., Kurnik, D., Solus, J., Sofowora, G. G., Xie, H. G., Jiang, L.,
et al. (2005). Variation in the α2B-adrenergic receptor gene (ADRA2B) and
its relationship to vascular response in vivo. Pharmacogenet. Genomics 15,
407–414. doi: 10.1097/01213011-200506000-00006
Nalli, A. D., Kumar, D. P., Al-Shboul, O., Mahavadi, S., Kuemmerle, J. F.,
Grider, J. R., et al. (2014). Regulation of Gβγi-dependent PLC-β3 activity
in smooth muscle: inhibitory phosphorylation of PLC-β3 by PKA and PKG
and stimulatory phosphorylation of Gαi-GTPase-activating protein RGS2
Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 40 December 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 601324
Hariharan et al. CNS Pericyte Ion Channels and GPCRs
by PKG. Cell Biochem. Biophys. 70, 867–880. doi: 10.1007/s12013-014-
9992-6
Narayanan, D., Bulley, S., Leo, M. D., Burris, S. K., Gabrick, K. S., Boop, F. A., et al.
(2013). Smooth muscle cell transient receptor potential polycystin-2 (TRPP2)
channels contribute to the myogenic response in cerebral arteries. J. Physiol.
591, 5031–5046. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.2013.258319
Nelson, M. T., Patlak, J. B., Worley, J. F., and Standen, N. B. (1990).
Calcium channels, potassium channels, and voltage dependence of
arterial smooth muscle tone. Am. J. Physiol. Cell Physiol. 259, C3–C18.
doi: 10.1152/ajpcell.1990.259.1.C3
Nelson, M. T., and Quayle, J. M. (1995). Physiological roles and properties of
potassium channels in arterial smooth muscle. Am. J. Physiol. Cell Physiol. 268,
C799–C822. doi: 10.1152/ajpcell.1995.268.4.C799
Newman, E. (1986). High potassium conductance in astrocyte endfeet. Science 233,
453–454. doi: 10.1126/science.3726539
Newman, E. A. (2013). Functional hyperemia and mechanisms of neurovascular
coupling in the retinal vasculature. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 33, 1685–1695.
doi: 10.1038/jcbfm.2013.145
Newton, A. C. (2010). Protein kinase C: poised to signal. Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol.
Metab. 298, E395–E402. doi: 10.1152/ajpendo.00477.2009
Nichols, A. S., Floyd, D. H., Bruinsma, S. P., Narzinski, K., and Baranski,
T. J. (2013). Frizzled receptors signal through G proteins. Cell. Signal. 25,
1468–1475. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2013.03.009
Nicolakakis, N., and Hamel, E. (2011). Neurovascular function in Alzheimer’s
disease patients and experimental models. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 31,
1354–1370. doi: 10.1038/jcbfm.2011.43
Nilius, B., and Droogmans, G. (2003). Amazing chloride channels: an overview.
Acta Physiol. Scand. 177, 119–147. doi: 10.1046/j.1365-201X.2003.01060.x
Nilius, B., and Owsianik, G. (2011). The transient receptor potential family of ion
channels. Genome Biol. 12:218. doi: 10.1186/gb-2011-12-3-218
Nilius, B., Owsianik, G., Voets, T., and Peters, J. A. (2007). Transient
receptor potential cation channels in disease. Physiol. Rev. 87, 165–217.
doi: 10.1152/physrev.00021.2006
Nilius, B., Prenen, J., Tang, J., Wang, C., Owsianik, G., Janssens, A., et al. (2005).
Regulation of the Ca2+ sensitivity of the nonselective cation channel TRPM4.
J. Biol. Chem. 280, 6423–6433. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M411089200
Nishioka, K., Nishida, M., Ariyoshi, M., Jian, Z., Saiki, S., Hirano, M.,
et al. (2011). Cilostazol suppresses angiotensin II-induced vasoconstriction
via protein kinase A-mediated phosphorylation of the transient receptor
potential canonical 6 channel. Arterioscler. Thromb. Vasc. Biol. 31, 2278–2286.
doi: 10.1161/ATVBAHA.110.221010
Niswender, C. M., and Conn, P. J. (2010). Metabotropic glutamate receptors:
physiology, pharmacology, and disease. Annu. Rev. Pharmacol. Toxicol. 50,
295–322. doi: 10.1146/annurev.pharmtox.011008.145533
Noorbakhsh, F., Vergnolle, N., Hollenberg, M. D., and Power, C. (2003).
Proteinase-activated receptors in the nervous system. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 4,
981–990. doi: 10.1038/nrn1255
Nortley, R., Mishra, A., Jaunmuktane, Z., Kyrargyri, V., Madry, C., Gong, H., et al.
(2019). Amyloid? oligomers constrict human capillaries in Alzheimer’s disease
via signalling to pericytes. Science 365:300. doi: 10.1126/science.aav9518
Ohkita, M., Tawa, M., Kitada, K., and Matsumura, Y. (2012). Pathophysiological
roles of endothelin receptors in cardiovascular diseases. J. Pharmacol. Sci. 119,
302–313. doi: 10.1254/jphs.12R01CR
Olah, M. E. (1997). Identification of A2a adenosine receptor domains involved in
selective coupling to Gs
: analysis of chimeric A1/A2a adenosine receptors. J.
Biol. Chem. 272, 337–344. doi: 10.1074/jbc.272.1.337
Orkand, R. K., Nicholls, J. G., and Kuffler, S. W. (1966). Effect of nerve impulses on
the membrane potential of glial cells in the central nervous system of amphibia.
J. Neurophysiol. 29, 788–806. doi: 10.1152/jn.1966.29.4.788
Owen, N. E. (1984). Regulation of Na/K/Cl cotransport in vascular
smooth muscle cells. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 125, 500–508.
doi: 10.1016/0006-291X(84)90568-0
Öz, G., DiNuzzo, M., Kumar, A., Moheet, A., and Seaquist, E. R. (2015). Revisiting
glycogen content in the human brain. Neurochem. Res. 40, 2473–2481.
doi: 10.1007/s11064-015-1664-4
Ozen, G., Benyahia, C., Amgoud, Y., Patel, J., Abdelazeem, H., Bouhadoun, A.,
et al. (2020). Interaction between PGI2 and ET-1 pathways in vascular smooth
muscle from Group-III pulmonary hypertension patients. Prostaglandins Other
Lipid Mediat. 146:106388. doi: 10.1016/j.prostaglandins.2019.106388
Paik, J. H., Skoura, A., Chae, S. S., Cowan, A. E., Han, D. K., Proia, R. L., et al.
(2004). Sphingosine 1-phosphate receptor regulation of N-cadherin mediates
vascular stabilization. Genes Dev. 18, 2392–2403. doi: 10.1101/gad.1227804
Palazzo, E., Marabese, I., de Novellis, V., Rossi, F., and Maione, S.
(2016). Metabotropic glutamate receptor 7: from synaptic function
to therapeutic implications. Curr. Neuropharmacol. 14, 504–513.
doi: 10.2174/1570159X13666150716165323
Park, J. Y., Kang, H. W., Moon, H. J., Huh, S. U., Jeong, S. W., Soldatov, N. M.,
et al. (2006). Activation of protein kinase C augments T-type Ca2+ channel
activity without changing channel surface density. J. Physiol. 577, 513–523.
doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.2006.117440
Patel, C., Narayanan, S. P., Zhang, W., Xu, Z., Sukumari-Ramesh, S., Dhandapani,
K. M., et al. (2014). Activation of the endothelin system mediates pathological
angiogenesis during ischemic retinopathy. Am. J. Pathol. 184, 3040–3051.
doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2014.07.012
Patton, N., Aslam, T., MacGillivray, T., Pattie, A., Deary, I. J., and Dhillon,
B. (2005). Retinal vascular image analysis as a potential screening
tool for cerebrovascular disease: A rationale based on homology
between cerebral and retinal microvasculatures. J. Anat. 206, 319–348.
doi: 10.1111/j.1469-7580.2005.00395.x
Paulino, C., Kalienkova, V., Lam, A. K. M., Neldner, Y., and Dutzler, R. (2017).
Activation mechanism of the calcium-activated chloride channel TMEM16A
revealed by cryo-EM. Nature 552, 421–425. doi: 10.1038/nature24652
Paulson, O. B., Hasselbalch, S. G., Rostrup, E., Knudsen, G. M., and Pelligrino, D.
(2010). Cerebral blood flow response to functional activation. J. Cereb. Blood
Flow Metab. 30, 2–14. doi: 10.1038/jcbfm.2009.188
Paulson, O. B., Strandgaard, S., and Edvinsson, L. (1990). Cerebral autoregulation.
Cerebrovasc. Brain Metab. Rev. 2, 161–192.
Pearson-Leary, J., and McNay, E. C. (2016). Novel roles for the insulin-regulated
glucose transporter-4 in hippocampally dependent memory. J. Neurosci. 36,
11851–11864. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1700-16.2016
Pébay, A., and Wong, R. C. B. (2017). Lipidomics of Stem Cells. Cham: Humana
Press. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-49343-5
Pedersen, S. F., Owsianik, G., and Nilius, B. (2005). TRP channels: an overview.
Cell Calcium 38, 233–252. doi: 10.1016/j.ceca.2005.06.028
Pelligrino, D. A., Vetri, F., and Xu, H. L. (2011). Purinergic mechanisms
in gliovascular coupling. Semin. Cell Dev. Biol. 22, 229–236.
doi: 10.1016/j.semcdb.2011.02.010
Peppiatt, C. M., Howarth, C., Mobbs, P., and Attwell, D. (2006). Bidirectional
control of CNS capillary diameter by pericytes. Nature 443, 700–704.
doi: 10.1038/nature05193
Perálvarez-Marín, A., Doñate-Macian, P., and Gaudet, R. (2013). What do we
know about the transient receptor potential vanilloid 2 (TRPV2) ion channel?
FEBS J. 280, 5471–5487. doi: 10.1111/febs.12302
Perez-Reyes, E. (2003). Molecular physiology of low-voltage-activated T-type
calcium channels. Physiol. Rev. 83, 117–161. doi: 10.1152/physrev.00018.2002
Peterson, B. Z., DeMaria, C. D., and Yue, D. T. (1999). Calmodulin is the Ca2+
sensor for Ca2+-dependent inactivation of L-type calcium channels. Neuron
22, 549–558. doi: 10.1016/S0896-6273(00)80709-6
Pitt, S. J., Reilly-O’Donnell, B., and Sitsapesan, R. (2016). Exploring the
biophysical evidence that mammalian two-pore channels are NAADP-activated
calcium-permeable channels. J. Physiol. 594, 4171–4179. doi: 10.1113/JP2
70936
Platania, C. B. M., Giurdanella, G., Di Paola, L., Leggio, G. M., Drago, F., Salomone,
S., et al. (2017). P2X7 receptor antagonism: implications in diabetic retinopathy.
Biochem. Pharmacol. 138, 130–139. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2017.05.001
Poyner, D. R., Sexton, P. M., Marshall, I., Smith, D. M., Quirion, R.,
Born, W., et al. (2002). International Union of Pharmacology. XXXII. The
mammalian calcitonin gene-related peptides, adrenomedullin, amylin, and
calcitonin receptors. Pharmacol. Rev. 54, 233–246. doi: 10.1124/pr.54.2.233
Pozzi, A., Yurchenco, P. D., and Iozzo, R. V. (2017). The nature
and biology of basement membranes. Matrix Biol. 57–58, 1–11.
doi: 10.1016/j.matbio.2016.12.009
Prakriya, M., and Lewis, R. S. (2015). Store-operated calcium channels. Physiol.
Rev. 95, 1383–1436. doi: 10.1152/physrev.00020.2014
Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 41 December 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 601324
Hariharan et al. CNS Pericyte Ion Channels and GPCRs
Praticò, D., and Dogné, J. M. (2005). Selective cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitors
development in cardiovascular medicine. Circulation 112, 1073–1079.
doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.104.524231
Proks, P., de Wet, H., and Ashcroft, F. M. (2010). Activation of the K(ATP)
channel by Mg-nucleotide interaction with SUR1. J. Gen. Physiol. 136, 389–405.
doi: 10.1085/jgp.201010475
Prossnitz, E. R., and Arterburn, J. B. (2015). International union of
basic and clinical pharmacology. XCVII. G protein–coupled estrogen
receptor and its pharmacologic modulators. Pharmacol. Rev. 67, 505–540.
doi: 10.1124/pr.114.009712
Purves, G. I., Kamishima, T., Davies, L. M., Quayle, J. M., and Dart, C. (2009).
Exchange protein activated by cAMP (Epac) mediates cAMP-dependent
but protein kinase A-insensitive modulation of vascular ATP-sensitive
potassium channels. J. Physiol. 587, 3639–3650. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.2009.
173534
Quayle, J. M., Nelson, M. T., and Standen, N. B. (1997). ATP-sensitive and inwardly
rectifying potassium channels in smooth muscle. Physiol. Rev. 77, 1165–1232.
doi: 10.1152/physrev.1997.77.4.1165
Quayle, J. M., Turner, M. R., Burrell, H. E., and Kamishima, T. (2006).
Effects of hypoxia, anoxia, and metabolic inhibitors on KATP channels in rat
femoral artery myocytes. Am. J. Physiol. Hear. Circ. Physiol. 291, H71–H80.
doi: 10.1152/ajpheart.01107.2005
Querques, G., Borrelli, E., Sacconi, R., De Vitis, L., Leocani, L., Santangelo,
R., et al. (2019). Functional and morphological changes of the retinal
vessels in Alzheimer’s disease and mild cognitive impairment. Sci. Rep. 9:63.
doi: 10.1038/s41598-018-37271-6
Quignard, J., Harley, E., Duhault, J., Vanhoutte, P., and Félétou, M.
(2003). K+ channels in cultured bovine retinal pericytes: effects of
β-adrenergic stimulation. J. Cardiovasc. Pharmacol. 42, 379–388.
doi: 10.1097/00005344-200309000-00009
Quinn, K. V., Cui, Y., Giblin, J. P., Clapp, L. H., and Tinker, A. (2003). Do anionic
phospholipids serve as cofactors or second messengers for the regulation
of activity of cloned ATP-sensitive K+ channels? Circ. Res. 93, 646–655.
doi: 10.1161/01.RES.0000095247.81449.8E
Quinn, K. V., Giblin, J. P., and Tinker, A. (2004). Multisite
phosphorylation mechanism for protein kinase A activation of the
smooth muscle ATP-sensitive K+ channel. Circ. Res. 94, 1359–1366.
doi: 10.1161/01.RES.0000128513.34817.c4
Raifman, T. K., Kumar, P., Haase, H., Klussmann, E., Dascal, N., and Weiss,
S. (2017). Protein kinase C enhances plasma membrane expression
of cardiac L-type calcium channel, Cav1.2. Channels 11, 604–615.
doi: 10.1080/19336950.2017.1369636
Ramos, D., Navarro, M., Mendes-Jorge, L., Carretero, A., López-Luppo, M.,
Nacher, V., et al. (2013). “The use of confocal laser microscopy to analyze mouse
retinal blood vessels,” in Confocal Laser Microscopy - Principles and Applications
in Medicine, Biology, and the Food Sciences, ed N. Lagali (London: IntechOpen),
19–37. doi: 10.5772/56131
Ranade, S. S., Qiu, Z., Woo, S. H., Hur, S. S., Murthy, S. E., Cahalan, S. M.,
et al. (2014). Piezo1, a mechanically activated ion channel, is required for
vascular development in mice. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 111, 10347–10352.
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1409233111
Ratelade, J., Klug, N. R., Lombardi, D., Angelim, M. K. S. C., Dabertrand,
F., Domenga-Denier, V., et al. (2020). Reducing hypermuscularization
of the transitional segment between arterioles and capillaries protects
against spontaneous intracerebral hemorrhage. Circulation 141, 2078–2094.
doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.119.040963
Reichhart, N., Schöberl, S., Keckeis, S., Alfaar, A. S., Roubeix, C., Cordes, M.,
et al. (2019). Anoctamin-4 is a bona fide Ca2+-dependent non-selective cation
channel. Sci. Rep. 9:2257. doi: 10.1038/s41598-018-37287-y
Robertson, B. E., and Nelson, M. T. (1994). Aminopyridine inhibition and voltage
dependence of K+ currents in smooth muscle cells from cerebral arteries.
Am. J. Physiol. Cell Physiol. 267, C1589–C1597. doi: 10.1152/ajpcell.1994.267.6.
C1589
Ross, E. M., and Wilkie, T. M. (2000). GTPase-activating proteins for
heterotrimeric G proteins: regulators of G protein signaling (RGS) and
RGS-like proteins. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 69, 795–827. doi: 10.1146/annurev.
biochem.69.1.795
Rossier, M. F. (2016). T-type calcium channel: a privileged gate for calcium
entry and control of adrenal steroidogenesis. Front. Endocrinol. 7:43.
doi: 10.3389/fendo.2016.00043
Rouach, N., Koulakoff, A., Abudara, V., Willecke, K., and Giaume, C. (2008).
Astroglial metabolic networks sustain hippocampal synaptic transmission.
Science 322, 1551–1555. doi: 10.1126/science.1164022
Rouget, C. (1873). Mémoire sur le développement, la structure et les proprietés
physiologiques des capillaires sanguins et lymphatiques. Arch. Physiol. Norm.
Pathol. 5, 603–663.
Rungta, R. L., Chaigneau, E., Osmanski, B.-F., and Charpa, S. (2018). Vascular
compartmentalization of functional hyperemia from the synapse to the pia.
Neuron 99, 362–337. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2018.06.012
Russell, F. D., and Davenport, A. P. (1999). Secretory pathways in endothelin
synthesis. Br. J. Pharmacol. 126, 391–398. doi: 10.1038/sj.bjp.0702315
Sadana, R., and Dessauer, C. W. (2009). Physiological roles for G protein-regulated
adenylyl cyclase isoforms: insights from knockout and overexpression studies.
NeuroSignals 17, 5–22. doi: 10.1159/000166277
Sakagami, K., Wu, D. M., and Puro, D. G. (1999). Physiology of rat retinal pericytes:
modulation of ion channel activity by serum-derived molecules. J. Physiol. 521,
637–650. doi: 10.1111/j.1469-7793.1999.00637.x
Salomone, S., Soydan, G., Ip, P. C. T., Hopson, K. M. P., and Waeber, C. (2010).
Vessel-specific role of sphingosine kinase 1 in the vasoconstriction of isolated
basilar arteries. Pharmacol. Res. 62, 465–474. doi: 10.1016/j.phrs.2010.09.002
Sasaki, Y., Hoshi, M., Akazawa, C., Nakamura, Y., Tsuzuki, H., Inoue, K., et al.
(2003). Selective expression of Gi/o-coupled ATP receptor P2Y12 in microglia
in rat brain. Glia 44, 242–250. doi: 10.1002/glia.10293
Sassone-Corsi, P. (2012). The cyclic AMP pathway. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect.
Biol. 4:a011148. doi: 10.1101/cshperspect.a011148
Sawyer, I., Smillie, S. J., Bodkin, J. V., Fernandes, E., O’Byrne, K. T., and Brain, S. D.
(2011). The vasoactive potential of kisspeptin-10 in the peripheral vasculature.
PLoS ONE 6:e14671. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0014671
Scherer, D., Seyler, C., Xynogalos, P., Scholz, E. P., Thomas, D., Backs,
J., et al. (2016). Inhibition of cardiac Kir current (IK1) by protein
kinase C critically depends on PKCβ and Kir2.2. PLoS ONE 11:e0156181.
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0156181
Schlingmann, K. P., Waldegger, S., Konrad, M., Chubanov, V., and Gudermann, T.
(2007). TRPM6 and TRPM7–gatekeepers of human magnesium metabolism.
Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1772, 813–821. doi: 10.1016/j.bbadis.2007.03.009
Schulte, G. (2010). International Union of Basic and Clinical Pharmacology.
LXXX. The class frizzled receptors. Pharmacol. Rev. 62, 632–667.
doi: 10.1124/pr.110.002931
Schwartz, E., Adamany, A. M., and Blumenfeld, O. O. (1981). Isolation and
characterization of the internal elastic lamina from calf thoracic aorta. Exp. Mol.
Pathol. 34, 299–306. doi: 10.1016/0014-4800(81)90047-2
Seino, S., and Miki, T. (2003). Physiological and pathophysiological roles
of ATP-sensitive K+ channels. Prog. Biophys. Mol. Biol. 81, 133–176.
doi: 10.1016/S0079-6107(02)00053-6
Sekiguchi, F., and Kawabata, A. (2013). T-type calcium channels: functional
regulation and implication in pain signaling. J. Pharmacol. Sci. 122, 244–250.
doi: 10.1254/jphs.13R05CP
Selim, S., Sunkara, M., Salous, A. K., Leung, S. W., Berdyshev, E. V., Bailey, A., et al.
(2011). Plasma levels of sphingosine 1-phosphate are strongly correlated with
haematocrit, but variably restored by red blood cell transfusions. Clin. Sci. 121,
565–572. doi: 10.1042/CS20110236
Sharif-Naeini, R., Folgering, J. H. A., Bichet, D., Duprat, F., Lauritzen, I., Arhatte,
M., et al. (2009). Polycystin-1 and−2 dosage regulates pressure sensing. Cell
139, 587–596. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2009.08.045
Sherwood, T. W., Frey, E. N., and Askwith, C. C. (2012). Structure and activity
of the acid-sensing ion channels. Am. J. Physiol. Cell Physiol. 303, C699–C710.
doi: 10.1152/ajpcell.00188.2012
Shi, Y., Chen, X., Wu, Z., Shi, W., Yang, Y., Cui, N., et al. (2008a). cAMPdependent protein kinase phosphorylation produces interdomain movement
in SUR2B leading to activation of the vascular KATP channel. J. Biol. Chem. 283,
7523–7530. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M709941200
Shi, Y., Cui, N., Shi, W., and Jiang, C. (2008b). A short motif in Kir6.1 consisting of
four phosphorylation repeats underlies the vascular KATP channel inhibition by
protein kinase C. J. Biol. Chem. 283, 2488–2494. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M708769200
Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 42 December 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 601324
Hariharan et al. CNS Pericyte Ion Channels and GPCRs
Shi, Y., Wu, Z., Cui, N., Shi, W., Yang, Y., Zhang, X., et al. (2007). PKA
phosphorylation of SUR2B subunit underscores vascular KATP channel
activation by beta-adrenergic receptors. Am. J. Physiol. Regul. Integr. Comp.
Physiol. 293, R1205–R1214. doi: 10.1152/ajpregu.00337.2007
Shih, A. Y., Rühlmann, C., Blinder, P., Devor, A., Drew, P. J., Friedman,
B., et al. (2015). Robust and fragile aspects of cortical blood flow in
relation to the underlying angioarchitecture. Microcirculation 22, 204–218.
doi: 10.1111/micc.12195
Shima, Y., Kawaguchi, S. Y., Kosaka, K., Nakayama, M., Hoshino, M., Nabeshima,
Y., et al. (2007). Opposing roles in neurite growth control by two seven-pass
transmembrane cadherins. Nat. Neurosci. 10, 963–969. doi: 10.1038/nn1933
Shyng, S. L., Ferrigni, T., and Nichols, C. G. (1997). Regulation of KATP channel
activity by diazoxide and MgADP. Distinct functions of the two nucleotide
binding folds of the sulfonylurea receptor. J. Gen. Physiol. 110, 643–654.
doi: 10.1085/jgp.110.6.643
Shyng, S. L., and Nichols, C. G. (1998). Membrane phospholipid control
of nucleotide sensitivity of KATP channels. Science 282, 1138–1141.
doi: 10.1126/science.282.5391.1138
Silva, A. S., and Zanesco, A. (2010). Physical exercise, β-adrenergic
receptors, and vascular response. J. Vasc. Bras. 9, 47–56.
doi: 10.1590/S1677-54492010000200007
Simon, M. I., Strathmann, M. P., and Gautam, N. (1991). Diversity of G proteins
in signal transduction. Science 252, 802–808. doi: 10.1126/science.1902986
Singh, A., Gebhart, M., Fritsch, R., Sinnegger-Brauns, M. J., Poggiani, C., Hoda, J.
C., et al. (2008). Modulation of voltage- and Ca2+-dependent gating of Cav1.3
L-type calcium channels by alternative splicing of a C-terminal regulatory
domain. J. Biol. Chem. 283, 20733–20744. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M802254200
Singh, J., Wen, X., and Scales, S. J. (2015). The orphan G protein-coupled receptor
Gpr175 (Tpra40) enhances Hedgehog signaling by modulating cAMP levels. J.
Biol. Chem. 290, 29663–29675. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.665810
Smith, I. F., and Parker, I. (2009). Imaging the quantal substructure of single IP3R
channel activity during Ca2+ puffs in intact mammalian cells. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U.S.A. 106, 6404–6409. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0810799106
Smrcka, A. V. (2008). G protein βγ subunits: Central mediators of G
protein-coupled receptor signaling. Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 65, 2191–2214.
doi: 10.1007/s00018-008-8006-5
Soboloff, J., Spassova, M. A., Tang, X. D., Hewavitharana, T., Xu, W., and Gill, D. L.
(2006). Orai1 and STIM reconstitute store-operated calcium channel function.
J. Biol. Chem. 281, 20661–20665. doi: 10.1074/jbc.C600126200
Soh, U. J., Dores, M. R., Chen, B., and Trejo, J. (2010). Signal transduction
by protease-activated receptors. Br. J. Pharmacol. 160, 191–203.
doi: 10.1111/j.1476-5381.2010.00705.x
Sokolovsky, M. (1995). Endothelin receptor subtypes and their role in
transmembrane signaling mechanisms. Pharmacol. Ther. 68, 435–471.
doi: 10.1016/0163-7258(95)02015-2
Souza Bomfim, G. H., Costiniti, V., Li, Y., Idaghdour, Y., and Lacruz, R. S. (2020).
TRPM7 activation potentiates SOCE in enamel cells but requires ORAI. Cell
Calcium 87:102187. doi: 10.1016/j.ceca.2020.102187
Stirling, L., Williams, M. R., and Morielli, A. D. (2009). Dual roles for RhoA/Rhokinase in the regulated trafficking of a voltage-sensitive potassium channel. Mol.
Biol. Cell 20, 2991–3002. doi: 10.1091/mbc.e08-10-1074
Stölting, G., Teodorescu, G., Begemann, B., Schubert, J., Nabbout, R., Toliat, M.
R., et al. (2013). Regulation of ClC-2 gating by intracellular ATP. Pflügers Arch.
465, 1423–1437. doi: 10.1007/s00424-013-1286-0
Stott, J. B., Povstyan, O. V., Carr, G., Barrese, V., and Greenwood, I. A.
(2015). G-protein βγ subunits are positive regulators of Kv7.4 and native
vascular Kv7 channel activity. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 112, 6497–6502.
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1418605112
Straub, A., Zeigler, A., and Isakson, B. (2014). The myoendothelial
junction: connections that deliver the message. Physiology 29, 242–249.
doi: 10.1152/physiol.00042.2013
Straub, S. V., Girouard, H., Doetsch, P. E., Hannah, R. M., Wilkerson, M. K., and
Nelson, M. T. (2009). Regulation of intracerebral arteriolar tone by Kv channels:
effects of glucose and PKC. Am. J. Physiol. Cell Physiol. 297, C788–C796.
doi: 10.1152/ajpcell.00148.2009
Striessnig, J., Pinggera, A., Kaur, G., Bock, G., and Tuluc, P. (2014). L-type Ca2+
channels in heart and brain. Wiley Interdiscip. Rev. Membr. Transp. Signal. 3,
15–38. doi: 10.1002/wmts.102
Sugimura, R., He, X. C., Venkatraman, A., Arai, F., Box, A., Semerad, C., et al.
(2012). Noncanonical Wnt signaling maintains hematopoietic stem cells in the
niche. Cell 150, 351–365. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2012.05.041
Sugiyama, T., Kawamura, H., Yamanishi, S., Kobayashi, M., Katsumura, K., and
Puro, D. G. (2005). Regulation of P2X7-induced pore formation and cell death
in pericyte-containing retinal microvessels. Am. J. Physiol. 288, C568–C576.
doi: 10.1152/ajpcell.00380.2004
Sung, T. S., Jeon, J. P., Kim, B. J., Hong, C., Kim, S. Y., Kim, J., et al. (2011).
Molecular determinants of PKA-dependent inhibition of TRPC5 channel. Am.
J. Physiol. Cell Physiol. 301, C823–C832. doi: 10.1152/ajpcell.00351.2010
Suzuki, J., Umeda, M., Sims, P. J., and Nagata, S. (2010). Calciumdependent phospholipid scrambling by TMEM16F. Nature 468, 834–838.
doi: 10.1038/nature09583
Swärd, K., Mita, M., Wilson, D. P., Deng, J. T., Susnjar, M., and Walsh, M. P.
(2003). The role of RhoA and Rho-associated kinase in vascular smooth muscle
contraction. Curr. Hypertens. Rep. 5, 66–72. doi: 10.1007/s11906-003-0013-1
Tadross, M. R., Johny, M., Ben, and Yue, D. T. (2010). Molecular endpoints of
Ca2+/calmodulin- and voltage-dependent inactivation of Cav1.3 channels. J.
Gen. Physiol. 135, 197–215. doi: 10.1085/jgp.200910308
Tadross, M. R., and Yue, D. T. (2010). Systematic mapping of the state
dependence of voltage- and Ca2+-dependent inactivation using simple openchannel measurements. J. Gen. Physiol. 135, 217–227. doi: 10.1085/jgp.2009
10309
Takezawa, R., Schmitz, C., Demeuse, P., Scharenberg, A. M., Penner, R., and
Fleig, A. (2004). Receptor-mediated regulation of the TRPM7 channel through
its endogenous protein kinase domain. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 101,
6009–6014. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0307565101
Tanabe, K., Tucker, S. J., Ashcroft, F. M., Proks, P., Kioka, N., Amachi, T.,
et al. (2000). Direct photoaffinity labeling of Kir6.2 by [gamma-(32)P]ATP-
[gamma]4-azidoanilide. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 272, 316–319.
doi: 10.1006/bbrc.2000.2780
Tarasov, A., Dusonchet, J., and Ashcroft, F. (2004). Metabolic regulation of the
pancreatic beta-cell ATP-sensitive K+ channel: a pas de deux. Diabetes 53,
S113–S122. doi: 10.2337/diabetes.53.suppl_3.S113
Taylor, M. S., Bonev, A. D., Gross, T. P., Eckman, D. M., Brayden, J. E., Bond, C. T.,
et al. (2003). Altered expression of small-conductance Ca2+-activated K+ (SK3)
channels modulates arterial tone and blood pressure. Circ. Res. 93, 124–131.
doi: 10.1161/01.RES.0000081980.63146.69
Tejada, M. A., Stople, K., Bomholtz, S. H., Meinild, A.-K., Poulsen, A. N., and
Klaerke, D. A. (2014). Cell volume changes regulate slick (Slo2.1), but not slack
(Slo2.2) K+ channels. PLoS ONE 9:e110833. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0110833
Thiriet, M. (2013). Tissue Functioning and Remodeling in the
Circulatory and Ventilatory Systems. Verlag; New York, NY: Springer.
doi: 10.1007/978-1-4614-5966-8
Thorin, E., and Webb, D. J. (2010). Endothelium-derived endothelin-1. Pflugers
Arch. 459, 951–958. doi: 10.1007/s00424-009-0763-y
Tilton, R. G., Kilo, C., and Williamson, J. R. (1979). Pericyte-endothelial
relationships in cardiac and skeletal muscle capillaries. Microvasc. Res. 18,
325–335. doi: 10.1016/0026-2862(79)90041-4
Tobo, M., Tomura, H., Mogi, C., Wang, J. Q., Liu, J. P., Komachi, M., et al.
(2007). Previously postulated “ligand-independent” signaling of GPR4 is
mediated through proton-sensing mechanisms. Cell. Signal. 19, 1745–1753.
doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2007.03.009
Tovey, S. C., Dedos, S. G., Rahman, T., Taylor, E. J. A., Pantazaka, E., and
Taylor, C. W. (2010). Regulation of inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptors by
cAMP independent of cAMP-dependent protein kinase. J. Biol. Chem. 285,
12979–12989. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.096016
Trost, A., Lange, S., Schroedl, F., Bruckner, D., Motloch, K. A., Bogner, B., et al.
(2016). Brain and retinal pericytes: Origin, function and role. Front. Cell.
Neurosci. 10:20. doi: 10.3389/fncel.2016.00020
Tsai, P. S., Kaufhold, J. P., Blinder, P., Friedman, B., Drew, P. J., Karten, H. J., et al.
(2009). Correlations of neuronal and microvascular densities in murine cortex
revealed by direct counting and colocalization of nuclei and vessels. J. Neurosci.
29, 14553–14570. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3287-09.2009
Tu, H., Wang, Z., Nosyreva, E., Smedt, H., De, and Bezprozvanny, I.
(2005). Functional characterization of mammalian inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate
receptor isoforms. Biophys. J. 88, 1046–1055. doi: 10.1529/biophysj.104.
049593
Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 43 December 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 601324
Hariharan et al. CNS Pericyte Ion Channels and GPCRs
Tucker, S. J., Gribble, F. M., Zhao, C., Trapp, S., and Ashcroft, F. M. (1997).
Truncation of Kir6.2 produces ATP-sensitive K+ channels in the absence of the
sulphonylurea receptor. Nature 387, 179–183. doi: 10.1038/387179a0
Tung, R. T., and Kurachi, Y. (1991). On the mechanism of nucleotide diphosphate
activation of the ATP-sensitive K+ channel in ventricular cell of guinea-pig. J.
Physiol. 437, 239–256. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.1991.sp018593
Ullrich, N. D., Voets, T., Prenen, J., Vennekens, R., Talavera, K., Droogmans,
G., et al. (2005). Comparison of functional properties of the Ca2+-activated
cation channels TRPM4 and TRPM5 from mice. Cell Calcium 37, 267–278.
doi: 10.1016/j.ceca.2004.11.001
Upchurch, C., and Leitinger, N. (2019). “Biologically active lipids in vascular
biology,” in Fundamentals of Vascular Biology. Learning Materials in Biosciences,
ed M. Geiger (Cham: Springer), 171–193. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-12270-6_9
Urtatiz, O., and Van Raamsdonk, C. D. (2016). Gnaq and Gna11 in
the Endothelin signaling pathway and melanoma. Front. Genet. 7:59.
doi: 10.3389/fgene.2016.00059
van de Kreeke, J. A., Nguyen, H. T., Konijnenberg, E., Tomassen, J., den
Braber, A., ten Kate, M., et al. (2018). Retinal and cerebral microvasculopathy:
Relationships and their genetic contributions. Investig. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 59,
5025–5031. doi: 10.1167/iovs.18-25341
Vanderheyden, V., Devogelaere, B., Missiaen, L., De Smedt, H., Bultynck, G.,
and Parys, J. B. (2009). Regulation of inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate-induced
Ca2+ release by reversible phosphorylation and dephosphorylation. Biochim.
Biophys. Acta 1793, 959–970. doi: 10.1016/j.bbamcr.2008.12.003
Vanlandewijck, M., He, L., Mäe, M. A., Andrae, J., Ando, K., Gaudio, F., et al.
(2018). A molecular atlas of cell types and zonation in the brain vasculature.
Nature 554, 475–480. doi: 10.1038/nature25739
Veldhuis, N. A., Poole, D. P., Grace, M., McIntyre, P., Bunnett, N. W., and
Christopoulos, A. (2015). The G protein–coupled receptor–transient receptor
potential channel axis: molecular insights for targeting disorders of sensation
and inflammation. Pharmacol. Rev. 67, 36–73. doi: 10.1124/pr.114.009555
Venkatachalam, K., and Montell, C. (2007). TRP Channels. Annu. Rev. Biochem.
76, 387–417. doi: 10.1146/annurev.biochem.75.103004.142819
Venkatachalam, K., Wong, C.-O., and Zhu, M. X. (2015). The role of
TRPMLs in endolysosomal trafficking and function. Cell Calcium 58, 48–56.
doi: 10.1016/j.ceca.2014.10.008
Vergarajauregui, S., Oberdick, R., Kiselyov, K., and Puertollano, R. (2008).
Mucolipin 1 channel activity is regulated by protein kinase A-mediated
phosphorylation. Biochem. J. 410, 417–425. doi: 10.1042/BJ20070713
Vermassen, E., Fissore, R. A., Kasri, N. N., Vanderheyden, V., Callewaert, G.,
Missiaen, L., et al. (2004). Regulation of the phosphorylation of the inositol
1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor by protein kinase C. Biochem. Biophys. Res.
Commun. 319, 888–893. doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2004.05.071
Vetri, F., Xu, H., Paisansathan, C., and Pelligrino, D. A. (2012). Impairment of
neurovascular coupling in type 1 diabetes mellitus in rats is linked to PKC
modulation of BKCa and Kir channels. Am. J. Physiol. Hear. Circ. Physiol. 302,
H1274–H1284. doi: 10.1152/ajpheart.01067.2011
Vilardaga, J. P., Romero, G., Friedman, P. A., and Gardella, T. J. (2011). Molecular
basis of parathyroid hormone receptor signaling and trafficking: a family B
GPCR paradigm. Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 68, 1–13. doi: 10.1007/s00018-010-0465-9
Villari, A., Giurdanella, G., Bucolo, C., Drago, F., and Salomone, S. (2017).
Apixaban enhances vasodilatation mediated by protease-activated receptor 2
in isolated rat arteries. Front. Pharmacol. 8:480. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2017.00480
von Bartheld, C. S., Bahney, J., and Herculano-Houzel, S. (2016). The search for
true numbers of neurons and glial cells in the human brain: a review of 150
years of cell counting. J. Comp. Neurol. 524, 3865–3895. doi: 10.1002/cne.24040
von Beckerath, N., Nees, S., Neumann, F. J., Krebs, B., Juchem, G., and Schömig,
A. (2000). An inward rectifier and a voltage-dependent K+ current in
single, cultured pericytes from bovine heart. Cardiovasc. Res. 46, 569–578.
doi: 10.1016/S0008-6363(00)00055-9
Wagner, T. F. J., Loch, S., Lambert, S., Straub, I., Mannebach, S., Mathar,
I., et al. (2008). Transient receptor potential M3 channels are ionotropic
steroid receptors in pancreatic β cells. Nat. Cell Biol. 10, 1421–1430.
doi: 10.1038/ncb1801
Wang, B., Li, C., Huai, R., and Qu, Z. (2015). Overexpression of
ANO1/TMEM16A, an arterial Ca2+-activated Cl− channel, contributes
to spontaneous hypertension. J. Mol. Cell. Cardiol. 82, 22–32.
doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2015.02.020
Wang, Q., Leo, M. D., Narayanan, D., Kuruvilla, K. P., and Jaggar, J. H. (2016).
Local coupling of TRPC6 to ANO1/TMEM16A channels in smooth muscle
cells amplifies vasoconstriction in cerebral arteries. Am. J. Physiol. Cell Physiol.
310, C1001–C1009. doi: 10.1152/ajpcell.00092.2016
Wang, Y., and Venton, B. J. (2017). Correlation of transient adenosine release
and oxygen changes in the caudate-putamen. J. Neurochem. 140, 13–23.
doi: 10.1111/jnc.13705
Watson, N., Linder, M. E., Druey, K. M., Kehrl, J. H., and Blumer, K. J. (1996).
RGS family members: GTPase-activating proteins for heterotrimeric G- protein
α-subunits. Nature 383, 172–175. doi: 10.1038/383172a0
Watts, A. O., Verkaar, F., Van Der Lee, M. M. C., Timmerman, C. A. W., Kuijer, M.,
Offenbeek, J., et al. (2013). β-Arrestin recruitment and G protein signaling by
the atypical human chemokine decoy receptor CCX-CKR. J. Biol. Chem. 288,
7169–7181. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.406108
Weiß, K. T., Fante, M., Köhl, G., Schreml, J., Haubner, F., Kreutz, M., et al. (2017).
Proton-sensing G protein-coupled receptors as regulators of cell proliferation
and migration during tumor growth and wound healing. Exp. Dermatol. 26,
127–132. doi: 10.1111/exd.13209
Wheeler, D. G., Groth, R. D., Ma, H., Barrett, C. F., Owen, S. F., Safa, P.,
et al. (2012). Cav1 and Cav2 channels engage distinct modes of Ca2+
signaling to control CREB-dependent gene expression. Cell 149, 1112–1124.
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2012.03.041
Wihlborg, A. K., Wang, L., Braun, O. Ö., Eyjolfsson, A., Gustafsson, R.,
Gudbjartsson, T., et al. (2004). ADP receptor P2Y12 is expressed
in vascular smooth muscle cells and stimulates contraction in
human blood vessels. Arterioscler. Thromb. Vasc. Biol. 24, 1810–1815.
doi: 10.1161/01.ATV.0000142376.30582.ed
Winkler, E. A., Bell, R. D., and Zlokovic, B. V. (2011). Central nervous
system pericytes in health and disease. Nat. Neurosci. 14, 1398–1405.
doi: 10.1038/nn.2946
Woodward, D. F., Jones, R. L., and Narumiya, S. (2011). International union
of basic and clinical pharmacology. LXXXIII: classification of prostanoid
receptors, updating 15 years of progress. Pharmacol. Rev. 63, 471–538.
doi: 10.1124/pr.110.003517
Worzfeld, T., Wettschureck, N., and Offermanns, S. (2008). G12/G13-mediated
signalling in mammalian physiology and disease. Trends Pharmacol. Sci. 29,
582–589. doi: 10.1016/j.tips.2008.08.002
Woszczek, G., Chen, L.-Y., Nagineni, S., Alsaaty, S., Harry, A., Logun, C., et al.
(2007). IFN-γ induces cysteinyl leukotriene receptor 2 expression and enhances
the responsiveness of human endothelial cells to cysteinyl leukotrienes. J.
Immunol. 178, 5262–5270. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.178.8.5262
Wroblewska, B., Santi, M. R., and Neale, J. H. (1998). Nacetylaspartylglutamate activates cyclic AMP-coupled metabotropic
glutamate receptors in cerebellar astrocytes. Glia 24, 172–179.
doi: 10.1002/(SICI)1098-1136(199810)24:2<172::AID-GLIA2>3.0.CO;2-6
Wu, D. M., Kawamura, H., Sakagami, K., Kobayashi, M., and Puro,
D. G. (2003). Cholinergic regulation of pericyte-containing retinal
microvessels. Am. J. Physiol. Hear. Circ. Physiol. 284, H2083–H2090.
doi: 10.1152/ajpheart.01007.2002
Wu, J., Lewis, A. H., and Grandl, J. (2017). Touch, tension, and transduction – the
function and regulation of piezo ion channels. Trends Biochem. Sci. 42, 57–71.
doi: 10.1016/j.tibs.2016.09.004
Wu, Y., Shyng, S. L., and Chen, P. C. (2015). Concerted trafficking regulation of
Kv2.1 and KATP channels by leptin in pancreatic β-cells. J. Biol. Chem. 290,
29676–29690. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.670877
Xi, Q., Adebiyi, A., Zhao, G., Chapman, K. E., Waters, C. M., Hassid, A.,
et al. (2009). IP3 constricts cerebral arteries via IP3 receptor-mediated TRPC3
channel activation and independently of sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca2+ release.
Circ. Res. 105:e1. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.108.173948
Xiao, Q., Yu, K., Perez-Cornejo, P., Cui, Y., Arreola, J., and Hartzell, H. C. (2011).
Voltage- and calcium-dependent gating of TMEM16A/Ano1 chloride channels
are physically coupled by the first intracellular loop. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
108, 8891–8896. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1102147108
Xiao, X., Liu, H. X., Shen, K., Cao, W., and Li, X. Q. (2017). Canonical
transient receptor potential channels and their link with cardio/cerebrovascular diseases. Biomol. Ther. 25, 471–481. doi: 10.4062/biomolther.2016.096
Xu, W., and Lipscombe, D. (2001). Neuronal Cav1.3α1 L-type channels
activate at relatively hyperpolarized membrane potentials and are
Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 44 December 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 601324
Hariharan et al. CNS Pericyte Ion Channels and GPCRs
incompletely inhibited by dihydropyridines. J. Neurosci. 21, 5944–5951.
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.21-16-05944.2001
Yamada, M., Isomoto, S., Matsumoto, S., Kondo, C., Shindo, T., Horio, Y.,
et al. (1997). Sulphonylurea receptor 2B and Kir6.1 form a sulphonylureasensitive but ATP-insensitive K+ channel. J. Physiol. 499, 715–720.
doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.1997.sp021963
Yang, G., Xu, J., Li, T., Ming, J., Chen, W., and Liu, L. (2010). Role of
V1a receptor in AVP-induced restoration of vascular hyporeactivity and its
relationship to MLCP-MLC20 phosphorylation pathway. J. Surg. Res. 161,
312–320. doi: 10.1016/j.jss.2009.01.005
Yang, H., Kim, A., David, T., Palmer, D., Jin, T., Tien, J., et al. (2012). TMEM16F
forms a Ca2+-activated cation channel required for lipid scrambling in
platelets during blood coagulation. Cell 151, 111–122. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2012.
07.036
Yang, L., Liu, G., Zakharov, S. I., Morrow, J. P., Rybin, V. O., Steinberg, S.
F., et al. (2005). Ser1928 is a common site for Cav1.2 phosphorylation by
protein kinase C isoforms. J. Biol. Chem. 280, 207–214. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M4105
09200
Yang, Y. (2012). Wnt signaling in development and disease. Cell Biosci. 2:14.
doi: 10.1186/2045-3701-2-14
Yang, Y. D., Cho, H., Koo, J. Y., Tak, M. H., Cho, Y., Shim, W. S., et al.
(2008). TMEM16A confers receptor-activated calcium-dependent chloride
conductance. Nature 455, 1210–1215. doi: 10.1038/nature07313
Yin, J., and Kuebler, W. M. (2010). Mechanotransduction by TRP channels: general
concepts and specific role in the vasculature. Cell Biochem. Biophys. 56, 1–18.
doi: 10.1007/s12013-009-9067-2
Yu, F. H., and Catterall, W. A. (2003). Overview of the voltage-gated sodium
channel family. Genome Biol. 4:207. doi: 10.1186/gb-2003-4-3-207
Yuan, K., Orcholski, M. E., Panaroni, C., Shuffle, E. M., Huang, N. F., Jiang, X.,
et al. (2015). Activation of the wnt/planar cell polarity pathway is required for
pericyte recruitment during pulmonary angiogenesis. Am. J. Pathol. 185, 69–84.
doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2014.09.013
Yudin, Y., and Rohacs, T. (2018). Inhibitory Gi/o-coupled receptors in
somatosensory neurons: potential therapeutic targets for novel analgesics. Mol.
Pain 14:1744806918763646. doi: 10.1177/1744806918763646
Yue, R., Li, H., Liu, H., Li, Y., Wei, B., Gao, G., et al. (2012). Thrombin receptor
regulates hematopoiesis and endothelial-to-hematopoietic transition. Dev. Cell
22, 1092–1100. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2012.01.025
Zamponi, G. W., and Currie, K. P. M. (2013). Regulation of Cav2 calcium channels
by G protein coupled receptors. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1828, 1629–1643.
doi: 10.1016/j.bbamem.2012.10.004
Zamponi, G. W., Striessnig, J., Koschak, A., Dolphin, A. C., and Sibley, D. R.
(2015). The physiology, pathology, and pharmacology of voltage-gated calcium
channels and their future therapeutic potential. Pharmacol. Rev. 67, 821–870.
doi: 10.1124/pr.114.009654
Zeisel, A., Hochgerner, H., Lönnerberg, P., Johnsson, A., Memic, F., van der Zwan,
J., et al. (2018). Molecular architecture of the mouse nervous system. Cell 174,
999.e22–1014.e22. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2018.06.021
Zhang, H. L., and Bolton, T. B. (1996). Two types of ATP-sensitive potassium
channels in rat portal vein smooth muscle cells. Br. J. Pharmacol. 118, 105–114.
doi: 10.1111/j.1476-5381.1996.tb15372.x
Zhang, Q., Cao, C., Zhang, Z., Wier, W. G., Edwards, A., and Pallone, T. L.
(2008). Membrane current oscillations in descending vasa recta pericytes. Am.
J. Physiol. Ren. Physiol. 294, F656–F666. doi: 10.1152/ajprenal.00493.2007
Zhang, T., Wu, D. M., Xu, G., and Puro, D. G. (2011). The electrotonic architecture
of the retinal microvasculature: modulation by angiotensin II. J. Physiol. 589,
2383–2399. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.2010.202937
Zhang, Y., Ji, H., Wang, J., Sun, Y., Qian, Z., Jiang, X., et al. (2018). Melatoninmediated inhibition of Cav3.2 T-type Ca2+ channels induces sensory neuronal
hypoexcitability through the novel protein kinase C-eta isoform. J. Pineal Res.
64:e12476. doi: 10.1111/jpi.12476
Zhang, Y. J., Zhang, L., Ye, Y. L., Fang, S. H., Zhou, Y., Zhang, W. P., et al. (2006).
Cysteinyl leukotriene receptors CysLT1 and CysLT2 are upregulated in acute
neuronal injury after focal cerebral ischemia in mice. Acta Pharmacol. Sin. 27,
1553–1560. doi: 10.1111/j.1745-7254.2006.00458.x
Zhao, G., Joca, H. C., Nelson, M. T., and Lederer, W. J. (2020). ATP- And voltagedependent electro-metabolic signaling regulates blood flow in heart. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 117, 7461–7470. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1922095117
Zhao, Q., Wu, K., Geng, J., Chi, S., Wang, Y., Zhi, P., et al. (2016). Ion permeation
and mechanotransduction mechanisms of mechanosensitive piezo channels.
Neuron 89, 1248–1263. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2016.01.046
Zhao, Q., Zhou, H., Chi, S., Wang, Y., Wang, J., Geng, J., et al. (2018). Structure
and mechanogating mechanism of the Piezo1 channel. Nature 554, 487–492.
doi: 10.1038/nature25743
Zhu, J., Zhuo, C., Xu, L., Liu, F., Qin, W., and Yu, C. (2017). Altered coupling
between resting-state cerebral blood flow and functional connectivity in
schizophrenia. Schizophr. Bull. 43, 1363–1374. doi: 10.1093/schbul/sbx051
Zimmerli, D. (2018). Elucidating the Roles of Wnt-Secretion and β-Catenin’s
Interaction Partners in Development and Disease. University of Zurich.
Zitron, E., Kiesecker, C., Lück, S., Kathöfer, S., Thomas, D., Kreye,
V. A. W., et al. (2004). Human cardiac inwardly rectifying
current IKir2.2 is upregulated by activation of protein kinase
A. Cardiovasc. Res. 63, 520–527. doi: 10.1016/j.cardiores.2004.
02.015
Conflict of Interest: The authors declare that the research was conducted in the
absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a
potential conflict of interest.
Copyright © 2020 Hariharan, Weir, Robertson, He, Betsholtz and Longden. This
is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (CC BY). The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums
is permitted, provided the original author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited
and that the original publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted
academic practice. No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not
comply with these terms.
Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 45 December 2020 | Volume 14 | Article 601324



HYPOTHESIS
Electro-metabolic signaling
Thomas A. Longden1,2 and W. Jonathan Lederer1,3
Precise matching of energy substrate delivery to local metabolic needs is essential for the health and function of all tissues.
Here, we outline a mechanistic framework for understanding this critical process, which we refer to as electro-metabolic
signaling (EMS). All tissues exhibit changes in metabolism over varying spatiotemporal scales and have widely varying
energetic needs and reserves. We propose that across tissues, common signatures of elevated metabolism or increases in
energy substrate usage that exceed key local thresholds rapidly engage mechanisms that generate hyperpolarizing electrical
signals in capillaries that then relax contractile elements throughout the vasculature to quickly adjust blood flow to meet
changing needs. The attendant increase in energy substrate delivery serves to meet local metabolic requirements and thus
avoids a mismatch in supply and demand and prevents metabolic stress. We discuss in detail key examples of EMS that our
laboratories have discovered in the brain and the heart, and we outline potential further EMS mechanisms operating in
tissues such as skeletal muscle, pancreas, and kidney. We suggest that the energy imbalance evoked by EMS uncoupling may
be central to cellular dysfunction from which the hallmarks of aging and metabolic diseases emerge and may lead to
generalized organ failure states—such as diverse flavors of heart failure and dementia. Understanding and manipulating EMS
may be key to preventing or reversing these dysfunctions.
Introduction
From the exquisitely elegant, computationally intense functions
of the brain to the error-free pumping of the heart across activity levels, there is a constant requirement that energy is
supplied to tissues and waste products are removed in an efficient manner. At the cellular level, the maintenance of ionic
gradients across the plasma membrane, protein synthesis and
transport, the processes of cell division, growth, and repair
(Buttgereit and Brand, 1995), and the diverse operations beyond
these are all inextricably tied to the ready availability of local
energy substrates. As these substrates are delivered via the
bloodstream, it makes all cells in all tissues critically dependent
on an optimized vascular function to direct blood to areas of
metabolic need at exactly the right moment. Understanding
exactly how this task is achieved throughout the body has engaged cardiovascular biologists since the earliest descriptions of
the circulatory system (Young, 1929; Harvey, 1957). Now with
the advent of modern molecular, electrophysiological, and imaging techniques, substantial progress has been made in determining the structure and function of the vascular system at high
resolution (Blinder et al., 2013; Tykocki et al., 2017; Vanlandewijck
et al., 2018; Hariharan et al., 2020; Kirst et al., 2020; Jackson,
2022; Meng et al., 2022). Together, these data enable precision
measurements of blood flow control spanning the molecular
to the systems levels. However, we still have an incomplete
understanding of how blood flow through tissues with highly
varied energetic demands is mapped to metabolic needs at the
organ, local network, and individual cell levels.
The EMS hypothesis
A diverse set of electro-metabolic signaling (EMS) mechanisms
operate throughout organ systems to precisely match local
energy demand with supply via capillary electrical signaling
to tightly control blood flow.
In this article, we set out the concept of EMS as a framework
to garner a new understanding of local blood flow control
mechanisms, which we have been developing over a number of
years (Lederer et al., 1996; Longden et al., 2017; Zhao et al.,
2020a). We hypothesize that this provides the core mechanistic link that enables the matching of energy demand to the delivery of increased blood flow across all organ systems (Fig. 1).
Here, we outline the theoretical basis of this unifying EMS hypothesis and underscore the technical developments that are
needed to accelerate progress in studying this phenomenon. The
core predictions made by the EMS hypothesis are:
............................................................................................................................................................................. 1
Department of Physiology, University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA; 2
Laboratory of Neurovascular Interactions, Center for Biomedical Engineering
and Technology, University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA; 3
Laboratory of Molecular Cardiology, Center for Biomedical Engineering and Technology,
University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.
Correspondence to Thomas A. Longden: thomas.longden@som.umaryland.edu; W. Jonathan Lederer: jlederer@som.umaryland.edu.
© 2024 Longden and Lederer. This article is distributed under the terms of an Attribution–Noncommercial–Share Alike–No Mirror Sites license for the first six months
after the publication date (see http://www.rupress.org/terms/). After six months it is available under a Creative Commons License (Attribution–Noncommercial–Share Alike
4.0 International license, as described at https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/).
Rockefeller University Press https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451 1 of 32
J. Gen. Physiol. 2024 Vol. 156 No. 2 e202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
• Energy-intensive processes in all organ systems should couple
to local hyperemia, as has been established for brain, heart,
and skeletal muscle among others.
• The signaling mechanisms that couple energy usage to
blood flow should satisfy the hallmarks of EMS, which we
outline below.
• EMS mechanisms operating in different organ systems should
share the same basis (Fig. 1) but may be tailored to suit the
particular spatiotemporal energy needs of the local tissue.
• Uncoupling of EMS should disrupt the matching of energy
supply to local demand and thereby may precipitate a range of
tissue dysfunction.
We explore these predictions in detail and outline key outstanding questions that need to be addressed to subject this
hypothesis to rigorous attempts at falsification.
Energy substrate supply and metabolism
The nanobattery adenosine triphosphate (ATP) stores energy
within its hydrolyzable phosphate–phosphate bonds that can be
tapped through serial chemical reactions to release energy to
power work throughout the cell. These reactions yield adenosine
diphosphate (ADP) and subsequently adenosine monophosphate
(AMP), which can then be further processed into adenosine.
Most often, however, ADP is rapidly phosphorylated back to ATP
to recharge the battery. Thus, cellular processes are primarily
fueled by the free energy liberated from the transfer of phosphoryl groups from ATP to acceptor molecules. The breaking of
the phosphoanhydride bonds between these groups (yielding
ADP and inorganic phosphate—Pi—if from ATP) enables the
work that undergirds the full gamut of complex cellular behaviors, ranging from motility and contraction to ion transport,
secretion, and the diverse reactions in cellular signaling. All
these processes are thus reliant on a range of metabolic enzymes
and mitochondrial functions, and the preferred carbon source
utilized for metabolism on a moment-to-moment basis differs
between tissues. In the brain, glucose is most heavily used
(Mergenthaler et al., 2013) while the heart often prioritizes lipid
sources (Goldberg et al., 2012).
Diverse energy buffers are also available, including glycogen
stored in the liver which can be mobilized to generate more
glucose on an as-needed basis. Circulating glucose is taken up
into cells via facilitated diffusion enabled by glucose transporters (GLUTs) and then catabolized through the subsequent
reactions of glycolysis, the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle
(Arnold and Finley, 2023), and oxidative phosphorylation
(Bonora et al., 2012; Fig. 2). The complete oxidation of a single
glucose molecule through these processes is estimated to yield
the formation of around 30 ATP molecules, although this
number varies between sources and may be modified as further
information becomes available (Rich, 2003).
Initially, glycolysis yields two ATP molecules during the
hydrolysis of a glucose molecule to two pyruvates. The latter can
then enter the TCA cycle in the mitochondria after conversion to
the high-energy intermediate acetyl coenzyme A (acetyl-CoA) to
produce the coenzymes nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide
(NADH) and flavin adenine dinucleotide (FADH2), which in turn
act as electron donors for the electron transport chain (ETC) in
Figure 1. An overview of EMS. EMS consists of three key stages (top) for which example inputs and outputs are given for an idealized tissue. This basic
framework can be applied to study EMS in different organ systems, but the molecules underlying initiation and transduction may vary. EMS is first initiated by
metabolic activity which causes a decrease in the availability of extracellular substrates and/or changes in intracellular energy status and an increase in
metabolic byproducts. In the second stage of EMS, this metabolic disturbance is sensed by the local vasculature and rapidly transduced into endothelial cell
membrane hyperpolarization via an increase in K+ channel activity, which will ultimately promote vasodilation and an increase in blood flow. Hyperpolarizing
signals are initiated in capillaries at the nexus of metabolic activity where capillary pericytes and endothelial cells play key roles in this process and are
transmitted either by passive electrotonic spread or by regenerative Kir2.1-mediated signaling upstream to areas of the vasculature covered in contractile cells
(i.e., contractile pericytes or smooth muscle cells). These contractile cells are induced to relax to produce an increase in blood flow, and this final output of EMS
delivers more substrates to the active region and has the effect of reversing the deviations from set-point of the initiating metabolic factors and homeostatically resets local metabolic reserves.
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 2 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
the inner mitochondrial membrane, wherein the flow of electrons through the protein complexes comprising the ETC culminate in the coupling of the electrochemical proton (H+)
gradient to oxidative phosphorylation, generating ATP via the
activity of ATP synthase (Fig. 2). In a system replete with energy
substrates, each mitochondrial ATP synthase produces in excess
of 100 ATP per second through this process, which can be increased to >400 ATP per second under catalytically optimal
conditions (Matsuno-Yagi and Hatefi, 1988). In intact cells, these
processes ultimately maintain a cytoplasmic ATP concentration
in the millimolar range (Greiner and Glonek, 2021), which is
typically several orders of magnitude higher than that of ADP
(free [ADP] in heart tissue has been estimated at 15 µM [Weiss
et al., 1992], in the brain at 12 µM [Roth and Weiner, 1991; Tabula
Muris Consortium, 2020], and in resting skeletal muscle at 6 µM
[Roth and Weiner, 1991]) and orders of magnitude higher still
than that of AMP (estimated at 71 nM in brain and 5 nM in
muscle [Roth and Weiner, 1991], and 250 nM in heart [Airan
et al., 2009]). The TCA cycle is the linkage point for the oxidation of all energy substrates, including fatty acids, lactate, ketone
bodies, and amino acids, which are through various mechanisms
processed to acetyl-CoA, which is then used to produce ATP
through the mechanisms described above (Arnold and Finley,
2023).
Ultimately the substrates and the oxygen (O2) required to
power the ETC are delivered in the blood via the plasma and its
O2-laden red blood cells (RBCs), respectively, which are directed
through the incredibly elaborate vascular networks of all tissues
(Box 1). To avoid deficits in energy supply, substrate delivery via
the blood needs to be matched precisely to the activity levels of
Figure 2. Metabolic cues for EMS. The basic metabolic processes occurring in all cells provide a rich tapestry of potential cues for EMS. Here, the oxidation of
glucose is depicted, showing several potential EMS cues in green. Initially, a substrate is transported into the cell cytoplasm for use. In this example, glucose is
brought in via GLUT transporters and then processed via the 10 reactions of glycolysis to yield two pyruvate molecules and two ATP, along with two NADH.
From here, pyruvate can be fermented to lactate, which can be released from cells via monocarboxylate (MCT) transporters. Alternatively, pyruvate can be
used to produce acetyl-CoA (also producing NADH and CO2 as a byproduct) that can enter the TCA cycle in the mitochondrial matrix. The TCA cycle reduces a
number of NAD+ molecules to NADH and FAD+ to FADH2, while also generating more CO2. The NADH and FADH2 in turn act as electron donors to the ETC in
the inner mitochondrial membrane to generate a proton gradient that ATP synthase (i.e., Complex V) uses to yield large amounts of ATP, which can then be
exported via the adenine nucleotide translocator in exchange for ADP. In addition to the generated CO2, lactate, or glucose levels themselves acting as cues, the
redox state of the cell or the ATP:ADP ratio may also signal to open K+ channels such as KATP to generate membrane hyperpolarization. Either ATP:ADP ratio in
the bulk cytosol or in submembrane regions around response elements could conceivably contribute to this process. The generation of these cues may occur
directly in the working cells of a given tissue such as cardiac myocytes in the heart, or in metabolic sentinel cells such as in pericytes in the brain.
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 3 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
organs and muscle at the most macroscopic levels, all the way
down to that of individual cells, while also being rapidly and
continually modulated to meet fluctuating local energetic needs.
Extensive work has uncovered the molecular mechanisms
through which the contractile state of smooth muscle cells
(SMCs) in arteries and arterioles is regulated to control perfusion (Segal et al., 1989; Segal and Duling, 1989; McCarron and
Halpern, 1990; Brayden and Nelson, 1992; Daut et al., 1994; Knot
and Nelson, 1995, 1998; Little et al., 1995a, 1995b; Nelson et al.,
1995; Bonev and Nelson, 1996; Dora et al., 1997, 2003; Haas and
Duling, 1997; Beach et al., 1998; Edwards et al., 1998; Porter et al.,
1998; Welsh and Segal, 1998; Jaggar et al., 2000; Jaggar, 2001;
Heppner et al., 2002; Ledoux et al., 2008; Xi et al., 2008;
Figueroa and Duling, 2009; Hannah et al., 2011; Mufti et al.,
2010; Takeda et al., 2011; Bagher et al., 2012; Dabertrand et al.,
2012, 2013; Sonkusare et al., 2012, 2014, 2016; Straub et al., 2012,
2014; Tran et al., 2012; Abd El-Rahman et al., 2013; Gonzales
et al., 2014; Harraz et al., 2014; Mercado et al., 2014; Earley
and Brayden, 2015; Sullivan et al., 2015; Wilson et al., 2015;
Garland et al., 2017; McCarron et al., 2017; Tajada et al., 2017; Lee
et al., 2018; Hald and Welsh, 2020; Ottolini et al., 2020;
Mironova et al., 2023), which is governed by control of the
membrane potential and intracellular Ca2+ levels. More recent
work is now revealing the role of the endothelial cells (ECs) of
capillaries and their closely associated pericytes calling for blood
flow increases and in the fine-tuning of the incoming flow of
blood (Beach et al., 1998; McGahren et al., 1998; Hall et al., 2014;
Longden et al., 2017, 2021; Harraz et al., 2018a, 2022; Lamb et al.,
2018; Gonzales et al., 2020; Moshkforoush et al., 2020; Zhao
et al., 2020a; Hartmann et al., 2021; Rosehart et al., 2021;
Thakore et al., 2021; Zambach et al., 2021; Hariharan et al., 2022;
Klug et al., 2023).
The milieu and signaling environments of the various organ
systems differ vastly throughout an organism, and thus the
question arises of how the continuous body-wide arterio–
capillary–venous network correctly integrates the thousands of
data streams arising from the diverse activities of local cells with
its relatively limited toolkit of protein sensors and actuators.
Here, we propose that the solutions to this problem lie in a set of
sophisticated yet generalized signaling mechanisms that ultimately convert increases in local energy demand into electrical
signaling throughout the vasculature and take center stage in
matching blood flow to metabolic needs in all tissues—a process
we refer to as electro-metabolic signaling or EMS (Fig. 1). We
outline this concept in detail and provide examples which we have
elucidated in the brain and the heart, along with key experimental
hallmarks that can be used to implicate this process in other tissues. We explore possibilities for the breakdown of EMS, which
may play an important role in a wide range of disease contexts
that involve mismatches between energy supply and demand, and
we detail the essential questions that need to be addressed to build
a complete view of the mechanistic landscape of EMS.
KATP channels are the key EMS transducers linking the cellular
metabolic state to an electrical signal
Central to EMS is the conversion of metabolic information
into electrical information that can be propagated through the
“wires” of the vasculature, and ATP-sensitive potassium (K+;
KATP) channels are uniquely suited to perform this task. Accordingly, we review below the key biophysical features of these
transducers, with a central focus on the vascular isoform of this
channel which makes an important contribution to EMS in the
brain, before discussing mechanisms through which KATP
channels may be engaged in response to changing the metabolic
state of the tissue.
KATP channels lie at the center of the EMS signaling network
and serve as the primary transducer that ties the internal cellular metabolic state to the membrane potential. These channels
thus can convert changes in the local metabolic environment
into electrical messages that can be transmitted over long distances (typically with the aid of Kir2.1 channels, as detailed
below) to the contractile cells of the vasculature (i.e., SMCs, and
the contractile pericytes of the proximal regions of the capillary
bed; Box 1).
The pore-forming subunits of KATP channels are members of
the Kir channel family (Inagaki et al., 1995; Hibino et al., 2010).
Currents through this family of channels depend on the driving
force for K+ (i.e., membrane potential [Em] minus EK). Accordingly, when Em is experimentally held at voltages negative to EK
(which does not occur under physiological conditions), Kir
channels conduct large, ohmic inward currents, but when Em is
positive to EK (as in healthy physiological conditions), outward
currents with varying degrees of inward rectification are
observed according to the channel subtype, causing the current–
voltage relationship to deviate from ohmic linearity. Rectification ranges from strong, in which only a small amount of current
flows from the interior of the cell to the exterior at potentials
positive to EK—as is the case for Kir2.1 channels which feature
prominently in electrical conduction, described below—to weak,
where rectification begins only at very positive potentials, tens
of millivolts from EK, as is the case for KATP channels (Hibino
et al., 2010).
The weakly rectifying current–voltage profile of KATP channels results mainly from intracellular Mg2+ block at positive
potentials (more positive than approximately −20 mV [Horie
et al., 1987]). The key property of these channels is that they
operate as exquisite molecular transducers coupling complex
changes in intracellular energy state to membrane electrical
activity. This stems from the unique sensitivity of KATP channels
to the ratio of intracellular ATP to ADP, being initially named for
the fact that when ATP levels increase, their K+ conductance is
inhibited (Noma, 1983). The basic structure of a functional KATP
channel is a hetero–octameric complex composed of four Kir6.x
subunits (either Kir6.1 or Kir6.2, encoded by KCNJ8 and KCNJ11,
respectively) and four sulphonyl urea receptor (SUR) subunits
(SUR1 or SUR2, encoded by ABCC8 or ABCC9, respectively;
Clement et al., 1997; Inagaki et al., 1997; Shyng and Nichols,
1997). Different Kir6.x/SURx subunit combinations create KATP
channels with differing nucleotide sensitivities and biophysical
characteristics. The resultant diversity of KATP channels are
widely expressed in cardiac myocytes (Noma, 1983), pancreatic
β-cells (Cook and Hales, 1984), skeletal muscle (Spruce et al., 1985),
neurons (Liss and Roeper, 2001; Ballanyi, 2004; Mart´ınez-François
et al., 2018), as well as vascular smooth muscle (Standen et al., 1989;
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 4 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
Beech et al., 1993; Sancho et al., 2022), endothelial cells (ECs; Aziz
et al., 2017; Sancho et al., 2022), and pericytes (He et al., 2018;
Vanlandewijck et al., 2018; Hariharan et al., 2020, 2022; Sancho
et al., 2022).
Box 1. Vascular organization and cell types
The vasculature is broadly segmented into arteries/arterioles, capillaries, and venules/veins, which coordinate distinct aspects of blood delivery. Arteries and
arterioles are composed of an inner lining of endothelial cells (ECs) that directly interface with the blood to convert luminal signals into a form that can be integrated by the overlying smooth muscle cells (SMCs; Fig. B1). The latter are the key contractile cells that, through actin–myosin crossbridge cycling, determine the
diameter of the lumen and thus the flow of blood flow into the capillaries. Control of SMC membrane potential and intracellular Ca2+ are central to this process.
Figure B1. Vascular organization and cell types. (A) Scanning electron micrograph (SEM) of a bifurcating arteriole covered in contractile smooth muscle
cells (SMCs; individual cells denoted in orange). Scale bar: 50 µm. (B) SEM of a contractile pericyte and its processes (pink) enwrapping a capillary. Note the
clear distinction from SMC morphology. Scale bar: 11.5 µm. A and B adapted with permission from Rodriguez-Baeza et al. (1998). (C) SEM of brain capillaries
showing the sequential branch ordering of vessels up to the fifth order (green). Note this system is not perfect, as some anastomosing vessels could be labeled
as two distinct orders (*). Scale bar: 50 µm. Adapted with permission from Krucker et al. (2006). (D) SEM of the choroid vasculature showing lobular vascular
architecture which makes it impossible to accurately assign branch orders (e.g., green vessels). 65× magnification. Adapted with permission from Miodonski ´
and Jasinski (1979) ´ .
In a number of vascular beds, capillaries are typically referred to by “branch order” in which the final SMC-covered arteriole is taken as the zero-order vessel,
and the initial capillary emanating from this is the first-order capillary. From here, branch numbering increases sequentially each time the capillaries branch,
regardless of vessel orientation or diameter. However, this classification system is difficult to apply in vascular beds in which the capillaries are highly anastomosing, such as heart, where this hierarchical ordering quickly breaks down by dint of the many reciprocal connections between adjacent capillaries (Longden
et al., 2023; Fig. B1). The capillaries are composed of exceptionally thin (∼100 nm) ECs that wrap around themselves once to form a lumen just wide enough to
allow RBCs to squeeze through in single file, experiencing significant mechanical forces as they go, and are covered by the cell bodies and processes of a range of
pericytes.
Using the brain as an example, at least three pericyte subtypes have been distinguished based on their locations in the capillary bed, their relative expression
of α-smooth muscle actin (α-SMA), and the appearance of their processes, designated ensheathing (or contractile) pericytes, mesh pericytes, and thin-strand
pericytes (Grant et al., 2019; Gonzales et al., 2020; Hariharan et al., 2020; Ratelade et al., 2020). Contractile pericytes (Fig. B1) cover the majority of the
parenchyma-facing surface of the first to approximately the fourth-order capillary ECs found immediately downstream of SMC-enwrapped penetrating arterioles
and heavily express α-SMA but have a distinct morphology to SMCs. Mesh pericytes are found immediately adjacent to the last contractile pericytes of a given
capillary offshoot and exhibit intermediate levels of vessel coverage and are α-SMA-negative. Finally, thin-strand pericyte (Hariharan et al., 2020) coverage begins
at approximately fifth-order branches and continues until the capillaries merge with the venular system (Grant et al., 2019). Each thin-strand pericyte has a unique
domain of extensive, exquisitely fine processes that stretch along the capillary surface for up to ∼300 µm (Berthiaume et al., 2018). Compared with contractile
pericytes, thin-strand pericytes express very low levels of α-SMA (Alarcon-Martinez et al., 2018; Vanlandewijck et al., 2018), suggesting that their contributions to
blood flow control mechanistically, in contrast with the rapid and dynamic regulation of the diameter of the underlying capillary orchestrated by their upstream
contractile counterparts (Hill et al., 2015; Gonzales et al., 2020; Zambach et al., 2021). Indeed, recently, the contractile abilities of thin-strand pericytes were
explored using optogenetic actuators and were revealed to be comparatively slower and smaller in magnitude, yet still capable of exerting a significant influence on
blood flow (Hartmann et al., 2021). Detailed studies of pericyte morphology and organization in other tissues are currently awaiting investigators’ attention.
RBCs transit the capillary bed, releasing their oxygen to the tissue as they go and are accompanied by nutrient-rich plasma from which energy substrates are
extracted and these are drained back toward the heart for recirculation initially in small venules and then in larger veins. The veins consist of the same components
as the arterioles, but here the smooth muscle is disorganized and non-contractile (Hill et al., 2015), and as such, these vessels do not substantially change their
diameter. In most tissues, luminal valves prevent the backflow of blood and pooling but these are absent from the brain where gravity assists drainage.
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 5 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
The most well-studied KATP isotype in pancreatic β-cells is
formed by Kir6.2 and SUR1 subunits (Noma, 1983; Inagaki et al.,
1995). In contrast, the “vascular” form of the KATP channel found
in SMCs, ECs, and pericytes is formed from Kir6.1 and SUR2
(Nelson and Quayle, 1995; Seino and Miki, 2003; He et al., 2018;
Vanlandewijck et al., 2018). SUR2 undergoes a range of alternative splicing events (Chutkow et al., 1999), which modulate
the nucleotide-binding properties and pharmacology of the
channel in its final form (Reimann et al., 2000). The variant
known as SUR2B, resulting from the excision of the final 129
coding base pairs plus 48 from the 39 untranslated region, is
thought to be the predominant isoform found in the vasculature
(Chutkow et al., 1999). In the heart, a combination of Kir6.2/
SUR2A gives rise to KATP channels that have distinct properties
from those in the vasculature and other locations. A number of
recent studies have solved the structures of several KATP channel
types at high-resolution by leveraging advances in single particle
cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM; Cheng, 2015; Cheng et al.,
2015), including a hamster SUR1–mouse/rat Kir6.2 hybrid complex and a human SUR1–Kir6.2 complex in both closed and open
states (Lee et al., 2017; Li et al., 2017; Martin et al., 2017; Zhao and
Mackinnon, 2021). Recently, Sung et al. (2021) provided the first
cryo-EM structures for the vascular Kir6.1/SUR2B KATP channel
in the presence of ATP and bound by the inhibitory compound
glibenclamide. This study determined that the architecture of the
vascular isoform of the channel exhibits key structural and
conformational features that are not observed in pancreatic KATP
channels prepared under similar conditions (Martin et al., 2017;
Wu et al., 2018), such as a displaced cytoplasmic domain as detailed below, which may confer distinct properties at the functional level that influence how these different channel subtypes
contribute to EMS.
Both Kir6.1 and Kir6.2 subunits are composed of two transmembrane helices bridged by an extracellular loop, which in
tetrameric assemblies generates the narrow portion of the pore
that comprises the highly conserved K+ selectivity filter, accompanied by cytoplasmic N- and C-terminal domains (Nichols,
2006). The hallmark feature of KATP channels is their regulation
of Em in response to changes in intracellular nucleotide concentrations (Table 1), which bind at several locations throughout
the channel complex. Micromolar ATP inhibits KATP channels
through a direct interaction with the Kir6.x subunit. Residues
R50 and K185 are essential for this ATP inhibition in Kir6.2, and
these positive charges are conserved at equivalent positions in
Kir6.1, but absent in most other ATP-insensitive Kir family
members (Trapp et al., 2003).
Because cytosolic intracellular ATP concentration is relatively high under physiological conditions, typically in the range
of 1–2 mM in SMCs (Larcombe-McDouall et al., 1999; Gribble
et al., 2000) and 5–10 mM in cardiac myocytes (Greiner and
Glonek, 2021), this can exert a powerful suppressive influence
on basal channel activity and is counterbalanced by the influences of other interacting molecules and signaling modifications
outlined below (Huang et al., 2019). Kir6.2 variants typically
exhibit higher free ATP sensitivity than Kir6.1-containing
channels (Table 1), and the recent structure provided by Sung
and colleagues reveals subtle differences that may contribute to
this distinction. In Kir6.1-containing channels, the cytoplasmic
domain of the pore-forming subunit is oriented ∼5.8 A further ˚
away from the membrane and rotated counterclockwise relative
to its Kir6.2 counterpart, allowing for fewer close residue interactions with ATP than are seen in the Kir6.2 ATP binding site.
This <1 nm difference in cytoplasmic domain positioning is thus
a possible contributory factor to the lower ATP sensitivity of the
vascular KATP isoform (Yamada et al., 1997; Satoh et al., 1998).
The large accompanying SUR subunits are members of the
ATP-binding cassette (ABC) membrane protein family and have
17 TM regions (Fig. 3). These regions are grouped into three
transmembrane domains: TMD0 (comprising TM1–TM5), TMD1
(TM6–TM11), and TMD2 (TM12–TM17). TMD0 is bound to the
channel α subunit via a bridging cytosolic loop referred to as L0,
which plays a crucial role in channel gating and activity, likely
by transmitting signals to the pore-forming subunit through
conformational rearrangements (Babenko and Bryan, 2003;
Masia et al., 2007; McClenaghan et al., 2018). Each SUR subunit
contains two nucleotide-binding domains (NBDs): one between
TMD1 and TMD2 (termed NBD1) and another in the C-terminus
following TMD2 (termed NBD2; Hibino et al., 2010; Lee et al.,
2017; Li et al., 2017; Martin et al., 2017). These NBDs are key sites
for nucleotide regulation and allow the interactions of magnesium (Mg2+)-bound adenosine diphosphate (Mg-ADP) and
Mg-ATP (as well as other Mg-nucleotides) to produce a key
stimulatory effect on KATP channel activity through NBD dimerization resulting in channel opening. Here, Mg-ATP binding
to NBD1 in conjunction with Mg-ADP binding to NBD2 promotes
dimerization, which leads to channel opening through conformational changes mediated via a structural element connecting
NBD1 to TMD2 known as the N1–T2 linker. At its C-terminal end,
this linker contains 15 glutamate/aspartate residues, forming a
region known as the ED domain. Molecular dynamics analyses
suggest that when MgADP is absent, electrostatic interaction
between NBD2 and the Kir6.1 cytoplasmic domain acts as an
autoinhibitory motif, preventing NBD2 dimerization with NBD1
and avoiding unregulated activation—consistent with low
spontaneous activity observed for the vascular form of KATP
channels (Fujita and Kurachi, 2000). The binding of MgADP to
NBD2 alters the shape of the ED domain, a reorganization that
allows the rotation of NBD2 toward NBD1 and thus promotes
dimerization and the transmission of a conformational change
that opens the channel.
A striking difference between the cardiac and vascular forms
of the KATP channel lies in the contrasting sensitivities of
channel activity to the membrane phospholipid phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate (PIP2). In Kir6.2-containing KATP
channels (Hilgemann and Ball, 1996; Baukrowitz et al., 1998), the
presence of PIP2 decreases the affinity of the channel for ATP
>100-fold and dramatically increases channel open probability
in the absence of nucleotides (Shyng and Nichols, 1998). In
contrast, the Kir6.1 form of the channel possesses a higher affinity for PIP2, with PIP2 binding so tightly as to render channel
activity insensitive to physiological fluctuations of this lipid, and
it has thus been suggested that this higher affinity may underlie
the more stable openings characteristic of vascular KATP channels (MacGregor et al., 2002; Quinn et al., 2003). In the context
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 6 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
of EMS, these observations collectively suggest that the mechanisms that engage KATP channels in cells expressing Kir6.2-
containing KATP channels, such as cardiac myocytes, may differ
from Kir6.1-expressing vascular cells. Indeed in the heart, with
its exceptionally high intracellular ATP levels (∼5–10 mM
[Greiner and Glonek, 2021]), modulation of membrane PIP2
levels might play an important role in creating the conditions for
KATP channel engagement. In the vasculature, by contrast, PIP2
concentration-related contributions are much less likely, and it
may be that changes in ATP:ADP ratio come to the fore in this
instance, or that other modulatory events such as coincident
channel phosphorylation are important for KATP activation.
In this vein, a stimulatory effect of protein kinase A (PKA)
has been observed for the activity of Kir6.1-containing channels.
PKA is activated by membrane Gs-coupled GPCRs that convert
ATP into cyclic AMP via adenylyl cyclase, which in turn promotes PKA engagement. PKA phosphorylation of multiple sites
(Ser-1351, Ser-1387) on the pore-forming and regulatory subunits of the KATP channel is known to produce a profound increase in channel open probability (Shi et al., 2007). Similarly,
PKG promotes KATP activation in the neuronal (Kir6.2/SUR1) and
cardiac (Kir6.2/SUR2A) forms of the channel (Han et al., 2001;
Chai and Lin, 2010; Chai et al., 2011), and vascular (Kir6.1/
SUR2B) KATP channels can also be engaged to generate membrane hyperpolarization by stimuli activating guanylyl cyclasecGMP signaling (Kubo et al., 1994; Murphy and Brayden, 1995),
which acts through PKG. In contrast, several consensus protein
kinase C (PKC) sites in the distal C-terminus of Kir6.1 have been
identified that mediate KATP inhibition. PKC is activated downstream of diacylglycerol (DAG), which is produced as a result of
GqPCR engagement and PIP2 hydrolysis. Therefore, activation of
any of the plethora of GqPCRs that are expressed in pericytes
(Hariharan et al., 2020) or cardiac myocytes (Litvinukov ˇ a et al., ´
2020) and other tissues is predicted to inhibit KATP channel
activity in the cell. When the serine residues that are the targets
of PKC phosphorylation (Ser-354, Ser-379, Ser-385, Ser-391, and
Ser-397) are mutated individually, moderate reductions in PKC
inhibition are observed, whereas combined mutation of these
residues produces greater effects, implying that the degree of
phosphorylation of KATP channels by PKC produces a graded
inhibition (Shi et al., 2008), allowing fine-tuning of activity.
In addition to these canonical signaling events, a number of
other modifications are known to affect KATP channel trafficking
and activity, including glycosylation (Conti et al., 2002), nitrosylation (Kawano et al., 2009), myristoylation (Lu et al., 2006),
and palmitoylation (Yang et al., 2020). Combined, these modes
of KATP regulation represent a rich and diverse molecular toolkit
for modifying KATP channel activity and density to influence the
membrane potential of the cell in response to a range of extracellular signals and across broad spatiotemporal domains.
Kir2 channels are central to transmission of electrical signals
Strong inward-rectifier K+ channels of the Kir2 family are
widely expressed and in the vasculature are functionally expressed in the plasma membranes of capillary (Longden et al.,
2017; Harraz et al., 2018a, 2018b) and arteriolar (Ahn et al., 2017;
Sonkusare et al., 2016) ECs and in SMCs (Longden et al., 2014;
Sonkusare et al., 2016). Three Kir2 channel subtypes (Kir2.1–2.3,
encoded by KCNJ2, KCNJ12, and KCNJ4) have been identified and
share similar structural and biophysical features, including their
near complete block by intracellular Mg2+ and polyamines as Vm
is progressively depolarized from EK, and sensitivity to blockade
by external barium (Ba2+) ions (Hibino et al., 2010). The crystal
structure of Kir2.2 (Tao et al., 2009) and more recently a cryoEM structure of Kir2.1 (Fernandes et al., 2022) have been solved,
revealing stunning details of these channels (Fig. 3).
Similar to the pore-forming region of the KATP channels described above, Kir2 channels are formed of tetramers of α
Table 1. Nucleotide and phosphoinositide regulation of KATP channel subtypes
Tissue location
(cell type)a
Subunit
config.
ATP inhibition
(IC50)
MgATP regulation
(EC50/IC50; µM)
MgADP activation
(EC50; µM)
PIP2 affinity
(ΔΔG; kJ/mol)
Refs
Pancreas (β cell) Kir6.2/SUR1 10–20 112–124b 8–11 38 Proks et al. (2010), (2014), Foster and
Coetzee (2016), Pipatpolkai et al. (2020)
Heart (cardiac
myocyte)
Kir6.2/SUR2A 21–100 541b 18 n.d.d Aguilar-Bryan and Bryan (1999),
Tammaro and Ashcroft (2007),
Pratt et al. (2012), Proks et al. (2014),
Foster and Coetzee (2016),
Pipatpolkai et al. (2020)
Vasculature
(smooth muscle)
Kir6.1/SUR2B 29–200 n.d.b 96c n.d.e Davies et al. (2010), Foster and
Coetzee (2016)
a
Note the possibility for a range of KATP isoforms to be expressed in an individual tissue, and that the listed isoforms may be found in other tissues, for example,
the “pancreatic” Kir6.2/SUR1 form of the channel is also found in neurons. b
Italicized text denotes IC50 values. Note that mutant channels (Kir6.2-G334D, Kir6.2-F333I) with reduced ATP sensitivity were used to reveal MgATP
sensitivities, as the effects of MgATP are normally strongly masked by inhibitory effects of free ATP. Similar mutants are needed to study MgATP regulation of
Kir6.1 containing channels in detail.
c
Measured in the presence of 10 µM pinacidil.
dLikely similar to Kir6.2/SUR1, above, as PIP2 binding free energy for Kir6.2 alone is 33 kJ/mol. e
Likely higher than for Kir6.1, as inferred from indirect measures in Quinn et al. (2003).
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 7 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
subunits, each of which has two transmembrane helices (termed
M1 and M2) that are connected via pore-forming loops and intracellular N- and C-termini and lack any accompanying accessory subunits (Fig. 3). The interaction of these channels with
PIP2 is critical for their activity, and readers are referred to
extensive discussion of PIP2 as a key modulator of ion channel
activity in elegant recent works for more detail (Hille et al., 2015;
Harraz et al., 2020). PIP2 binds to the Kir2.1 channel with a KD of
∼3 µM, and it has been proposed that such binding leads to a
conformational change in a conserved 15 amino-acid cytoplasmic motif known as the “G-loop” that leads to channel gating
(Fernandes et al., 2022).
Figure 3. K+ channels at the heart of EMS. (A) Topographic depiction of vascular KATP channel composition showing a two-transmembrane Kir6.1 subunit
alongside its much larger companion 17-transmembrane SUR2B. (B) Side-on cryo-EM density map of the vascular KATP channel in the presence of the inhibitor
glibenclamide. (C) Structural model of the data shown in B, showing the locations of the glibenclamide binding site (Glib), SUR nucleotide-binding domains
(NBDs), ATP binding sites (ATP), and the L0 linker, as well as several transmembrane domains (TMDs). (D) Top-down view of the channel as seen from the
extracellular side. (A–D) Modified with permission from Sung et al. (2021). (E) Side-on (left), top-down (upper right), and bottom-up (lower right) cryo-EM
density maps of the Kir2.1 channel at 4.3 A resolution. ˚ (F) Model of the data in E shows key structural features. K+ ions and blocking strontium ions (which
mimic Mg2+ ions) are shown in the pore in magenta and green, respectively. (G) Top-down model of the channel seen from the extracellular side showing
chains comprising the transmembrane domains in blue and disulfide bridges between subunits in red. (E–G) Modified with permission from Fernandes et al.
(2022).
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 8 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
The other major interaction of Kir2 channels that is essential
for understanding their function is their intracellular block by
polyamines and Mg2+ ions which underlies their strongly rectifying behavior. This has been attributed to two negatively
charged regions of the pore around residue D172 in the M2 helix
(Lu and MacKinnon, 1994) and the E224 and E299 residues close
to the G-loop (Kubo and Murata, 2001). The rings of negative
charge that these residues impart to the channel pore attract
positively charged blocking particles, which in turn is thought to
impair K+ permeation by hindering ion access to the selectivity
filter (Fernandes et al., 2022). As this blockade by polyamines
and Mg2+ depends on voltage, it can as a matter of course be
relived through membrane hyperpolarization toward EK. Hyperpolarization progressively lowers the probability that the
pore is occluded and thereby permits K+ exit from the cell down
the electrochemical gradient to generate outward hyperpolarizing K+ currents. Accordingly, there is a self-amplifying
effect inherent to Kir currents wherein the outward currents
permitted by hyperpolarization generate further hyperpolarization and thereby promote further relief of voltage-dependent
channel blockade (Longden and Nelson, 2015). A similar effect
can be achieved through the elevation of external K+, which
causes a rightward shift in the current–voltage profile of the
channel. In the context of the vasculature, where resting Vm is
between −30 and −40 mV, this rightward shift allows for relief of
the voltage-dependent block of the channel by promoting the
relief of the channel block at these potentials. We and others
have extensively reviewed the biophysical properties of Kir2
channels, and thus readers are directed to these articles for
further information on these topics (Hibino et al., 2010; Longden
and Nelson, 2015).
We argue below that the outward currents through Kir2
channels generated by membrane hyperpolarization, alongside
their K+ sensitivity, are critical for signal transmission from
capillaries during EMS.
The hallmarks of EMS
At its core, the input–output pattern of EMS is reflected in the
conversion of the level of local metabolic demand in a tissue into
electrical signaling throughout the vasculature (Fig. 1). Below,
we discuss three key stages that define this phenomenon: (1) the
generation of metabolic signals and the array of possible forms
they may take; (2) the sensing and transduction mechanisms that
generate vascular electrical signals, along with the propagation
mechanisms for these signals from capillaries to arterioles; and
(3) the homeostatic adjustment of blood flow to deliver energy
substrates to satisfy local metabolic needs.
Stage I: Elevated metabolic activity is the initiating input to EMS
The first hallmark of EMS is that it is driven by an elevation of
metabolic demand in the tissue (Fig. 1). This naturally results in
an array of complex intra- and extracellular modifications which
may act as triggering factors to initiate the adaptive blood flow
changes provided by EMS. Given the wide range of potential
energy sources and the enormous complexity of the cell’s metabolic pathways, there exists a vast array of biochemical signatures that could act as the initiation event for EMS in different
tissues. Here, we focus our discussion on currently known EMS
signals and exciting unexplored possibilities.
Decreased substrate availability as an EMS trigger. Perhaps
operating most directly as an initiating factor, a decrease in local
energy substrate availability due to uptake or depletion during
activity may act as a primary driver of EMS. Indeed, we recently
demonstrated that this is the case for brain glucose, where
capillary pericytes sense and respond to local glucose availability
(Hariharan et al., 2022), and similar mechanisms may exist for
other energy substrates.
Many cells express glucose transporters (GLUTs) to directly
take up glucose from their environment. GLUTs are facilitative
transporters that utilize the gradient of glucose to direct it to
locations of relatively low concentration and have varying kinetics and affinities which can be modulated by intracellular
signaling pathways, such that glucose uptake can be modified in
an activity-dependent manner (Thorens and Mueckler, 2010).
For example, the membrane density of GLUT4 proteins can be
rapidly adjusted in response to signaling events. In muscle and
fat cells, GLUT4 is under the direct control of insulin signaling,
the elevation of which results in rapid membrane insertion of
reserve pools of this transporter stored in submembrane vesicles, thereby rapidly augmenting the glucose import capacity of
the cell (Stockli et al., 2011 ¨ ). Increasing glucose import via such
mechanisms can lead to an increase in the breakdown and oxidation of glucose by active cells, and this can in turn rapidly
change local external glucose concentrations.
Brain regional glucose has been observed to fall ∼30% from
its resting level of ∼1 mM during a maze task (McNay et al.,
2001), presumably due to its rapid uptake by neurons
(Lundgaard et al., 2015; Li et al., 2023) or local astrocytes
(Pellerin and Magistretti, 1994; Rouach et al., 2008), with onset
on the order of seconds (Gold and Korol, 2012). Interestingly, in
aged animals, depletion of local glucose during the same task is
even more extreme, reaching a nadir of ∼50% below resting
levels during task performance (McNay and Gold, 2001), which
could further increase metabolic strain on highly active neurons.
In younger animals, the drop in glucose is typically sustained for
some time during task performance and then corrected back to
baseline levels (McNay et al., 2001), suggesting perhaps that the
initial dearth of glucose could act as a signal to the vasculature to
indicate local metabolic activation and prompt the initiation of
EMS to correct the supply deficit.
Tight control of local glucose is essential in the brain, which
operates as an on-demand system relying almost exclusively on
incoming glucose transported across the blood–brain barrier by
the heavily expressed GLUTs, in particular the GLUT1 isoform
(Deng et al., 2014), located in the endothelium and astrocytic
endfeet (Mergenthaler et al., 2013). A prevailing view is that
glucose is taken up into astrocytic endfeet during neuronal activity via GLUT1 transporters prompted by glutamatergic signaling and glutamate uptake at the tripartite synapse, and this
promotes glycolysis leading to the generation of pyruvate. This
generated pyruvate is then converted to lactate (by lactate dehydrogenase [LDH] 5) in astrocytes, which is passed via monocarboxylate transporters (MCTs 4 and 1) into the extracellular
space, and MCT2 on neurons then permits its uptake into these
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 9 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
cells. It is suggested that the lactate accumulated in neurons is
then converted by resident LDH1 into pyruvate which can enter
the TCA cycle to ultimately generate ATP via oxidative phosphorylation (Mergenthaler et al., 2013). This mechanism has
been termed the astrocyte-neuron lactate shuttle (ANLS).
However, recent studies have questioned the extent to which
neurons depend on astrocytes to provide lactate as a fuel via this
mechanism, as opposed to taking up glucose directly from their
immediate environment and processing this with their own
metabolic machinery (Chuquet et al., 2010; Lundgaard et al.,
2015). Indeed, GLUT3, which has a higher glucose transport
rate than GLUT1 (Simpson et al., 2008), is expressed by neurons
to enable their direct uptake of glucose from the surrounding
parenchyma, and this has led to a counterview in which neurons
process their own glucose for glycolysis and oxidative phosphorylation (Patel et al., 2014; Lundgaard et al., 2015; Peng et al.,
2021), in the process releasing lactate into the extracellular space
(Dienel, 2012). Further work is needed to establish exactly how
glucose is handled by these two cell types.
The brain also maintains a diminutive reservoir of glycogen
(Choi and Gruetter, 2003; Oz et al., 2003 ¨ , 2015; DiNuzzo, 2019),
which accounts for a low percentage of total glucose metabolism
during normal operations and is at least 20 times smaller than
reserves stored in muscle, and 50–100 times lower than that
sequestered in the liver (Ö
z et al., 2007; Obel et al., 2012). Thus,
while the brain appears to depend directly on local glucose on an
as-needed basis, in systems with significant glycogen reserves
these may be mobilized as glucose levels fall to provide sustained
buffering for energy production, and thus EMS may turn on
over a longer and more gradual time scale or may depend on
other triggering factors.
Intriguingly, several GLUT isoforms are expressed directly in
SMCs and pericytes, including transcripts for GLUT1, GLUT3,
and GLUT4 (He et al., 2018; Vanlandewijck et al., 2018). The
relative activity of these transporters could influence the sensitivity of EMS mechanisms embedded in the vasculature. For
example, if GLUT4 transporters are active in the membrane as
opposed to sequestered in reserve pools this could reduce the
sensitivity of vascular EMS mechanisms to glucose fluctuations
by maintaining higher intracellular ATP levels. These possibilities for tuning EMS and their consequences for blood flow
control are intriguing avenues for future investigation.
Cytosolic ATP as a driver of EMS. The major mechanism
through which the energy substrates that are taken into a cell
are converted into ATP is mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation. This process will set the bulk ATP level in the cytosol,
which is typically within the millimolar range, as noted above.
Although many mechanisms exist to protect and maintain cytosolic ATP concentrations, it is possible that subtle fluctuations
in bulk ATP could drive EMS via KATP channel activity.
The organization, function, and regulation of KATP channels
are likely to reflect the EMS mechanisms deployed by a given
cell type. At one extreme are the cardiac ventricular myocytes,
wherein the KATP channel density is extremely high (∼10
channels/µm2
, corresponding to around 50,000 channels per
cell; Nichols and Lederer, 1990). This high expression of the
KATP channel is appropriate for the 5–10 mM cytosolic ATP
concentration estimated from NMR data (Greiner and Glonek,
2021) when considered alongside the low IC50 for ATP at the
cardiac isoform of the KATP channel (∼21–100 µM; Table 1; Foster
and Coetzee, 2016). Having thousands of KATP channels in the
membrane will increase sensitivity to small dips in ATP, which
will likely increase their open probability only marginally. Given
the large single channel current (∼80 pS; Foster and Coetzee,
2016), a single channel opening is capable of deflecting the
membrane potential substantially, and thus this could thus
tightly couple small changes in ATP to EMS mechanisms in
the heart.
Similar measurements are needed to inform our understanding of the possibilities for KATP channel control throughout
the vasculature in pericytes, SMCs, and ECs (and of course also
in other cell types expressing KATP channels), as channel membrane density and intracellular ATP levels and dynamics are
thought to be key parameters that contribute to EMS control
mechanisms. For example, at the opposite extreme to cardiac
myocytes would be a small cell working as a metabolic sentinel to
influence local blood flow by directly modulating electrical activity in the vascular system, like capillary pericytes in the
brain (Hariharan et al., 2022). Such cells would benefit from
having local intracellular machinery to make and control ATP
directly around the channel in a submembrane region of
the cell. Very tight coupling between extracellular substrate
availability and submembrane ATP would thereby allow tight
and responsive control of the KATP channel to rapidly produce
hyperpolarizing electrical signals, a concept we explore in more
detail below.
Glycolytic-KATP channel complexes: Potential EMS signaling
microdomains responding to localized changes intracellular energy
status. Upon entering the cell cytosol glucose is broken down
via a series of 10 enzymatic reactions to produce ATP, pyruvate,
and NADH. Intriguingly, a range of glycolytic enzymes, including aldolase A, pyruvate kinase, triosephosphate isomerase, and
glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) have been
found to be physically associated with KATP channels in cardiac
membranes in studies using a combination of two-hybrid
screening, GST pulldown and immunoprecipitation (DharChowdhury et al., 2005; Jovanovic et al., 2005 ´ ; Hong et al.,
2011). More recently, a glycolytic metabolon regulating the
KATP channel has been described in pancreatic membranes
(Ho et al., 2023). These close associations may provide a
direct means through which highly localized metabolism of
glucose in the submembrane environment could be directly
coupled to KATP activity.
Such local organization to enable compartmentalized communication could be critically important for tight control of KATP
activity, as even during vigorous activity global ATP levels are
closely safeguarded (Balaban, 1986) and thus the global concentration change in a typical cell is minimal. Many intracellular
homeostatic mechanisms have evolved to preserve this high
concentration of available intracellular ATP. Examples abound:
creatine kinase, found in skeletal and heart muscle, in the brain,
and in the mitochondria of various tissues, plays an important
role in producing creatine-phosphate when ATP demands are
low, which acts as an immediately available energy reservoir
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 10 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
that can be drawn upon to generate ATP from ADP during periods of intense work (Yaniv et al., 2010; Metallo and Vander
Heiden, 2013); phosphofructokinase-1 (PFK-1), a rate-limiting
enzyme that performs the third reaction in the glycolytic
chain (Jenkins et al., 2011), is allosterically controlled—when
ATP is replete, PFK-1 is inhibited, but as energy availability falls
within the cell and ADP and AMP levels rise its activity is promoted with the effect of buffering ATP levels by modulating
glycolytic rate which can be tuned over a 100-fold range (Voet
et al., 2016). There are many further examples of regulatory
processes that operate to protect ATP availability, and as such it
is unlikely that a decrease in intracellular ATP per se operates
widely as a trigger of EMS mechanisms. (Although, note the
example of the high density of KATP channels in cardiac membranes in the preceding section, which offers a simple emergent
solution to the problem of sensing subtle changes in ATP.)
As intracellular ADP and AMP levels are typically several
orders of magnitude below ATP in a cell at rest, their relative
variance is much more dramatic during cellular activity. Indeed,
as working muscle ramps its ATP turnover rate, ADP levels have
been estimated to increase as much as fivefold (Allen et al., 1997)
and AMP levels even more so (McConell et al., 2020). The
combination of relatively stable ATP levels as a backdrop against
substantial relative changes in ADP thus decreases the ATP:ADP
ratio—a key intracellular energy parameter that influences a
wide range of intracellular metabolic activities which may be
more likely to be a key EMS cue. Recently, the development
of a highly sensitive reporter of ATP:ADP ratio, PercevalHR
(Tantama et al., 2013), has allowed for the first single-cell resolution observations of changes in this metabolic indicator. Intriguingly, this sensor revealed that decreases in external
glucose around neurons within the physiological range result in
a substantial decrease in ATP:ADP ratio. Electrical activity was
also directly linked to changes in ratio, and these were directly
linked to hyperpolarization of the membrane through the engagement of KATP channels (Tantama et al., 2013). As such,
activity-induced changes in ATP:ADP ratio primarily resulting
from relative changes in ADP concentrations likely represent a
more labile metabolic parameter than bulk ATP that can be
rapidly converted into robust electrical activity in cells expressing KATP channels, which could be a central trigger for
blood flow increases in EMS. In vascular cells expressing KATP
for example, it is anticipated that the ATP:ADP ratio will tilt in
favor of channel activation (i.e., higher ADP, lower ATP) during
local substrate depletion in the tissue to generate electrical signals and promote hyperemia.
Returning to the observation that KATP channels physically
associate with glycolytic machinery, the substrates of aldolase
and pyruvate kinase were both shown to suppress KATP channel
activity in excised membrane patches (Hong et al., 2011), and
these observations are buttressed by similar findings in vesicles
containing KATP channels derived from small intestine epithelial
cells (Dubinsky et al., 1998). It thus follows that the glycolytic
machinery of the cell may constitute part of a macromolecular
signaling complex organized around KATP channels that tightly
regulates their activity. A decrease in glycolysis could trigger a
rapid increase in microdomain ADP around the channel (and
potentially a fall in submembrane ATP), which could increase
KATP activity. Accordingly, the KATP channel in certain situations
may be set up to sense a functionally compartmentalized ATP:
ADP ratio in the submembrane region around the channel, as
opposed to that of the bulk cytoplasm. Such a privileged environment would presumably serve to amplify subtle changes in
metabolism and enable the KATP channel to be rapidly responsive. A number of studies also suggest that the sodium/potassium (Na+/K+) ATPase is associated with this membrane complex
of glycolytic enzymes and KATP channels, which may add a further dimension to this organization (Urbach et al., 1996; Schultz,
1997; Dubinsky et al., 1998; Sepp et al., 2014): ATP from microdomain glycolysis could fuel pumping activity to restore Na+ and
K+ levels after membrane potential deviations. Such increases in
Na+/K+ ATPase activity would be expected to affect the local ATP:
ADP ratio and increase KATP channel activity. While it is yet to
be determined whether such highly localized glycolytic-KATP
channel complexes contribute to EMS, this is an intuitive and
appealing possibility.
Beyond glucose, variations in the availability of other energy
substrates could trigger EMS through similar principles but the
involvement of distinct molecular players. The heart, in contrast
to the brain, has been described as “omnivorous,” in that it
generates ATP from an array of substrates (Wende et al., 2017).
Under normal conditions in healthy adults, free fatty acid oxidation takes center-stage in heart metabolism, generating
acetyl-coA, which is then utilized to produce ATP via oxidative
phosphorylation. In contrast, catabolism of glucose makes only a
small contribution to cardiac energy under working conditions
(e.g., only 5% of ATP is produced by glycolysis), but this balance
may shift when the heart is under stress. Further contributions
to heart metabolism are provided by amino acids, ketone bodies,
and circulating lactate (Ritterhoff and Tian, 2017).
The kidney also has incredibly high energy demands, turning
over large amounts of ATP to enable its roles in filtering waste
from the blood, reabsorbing nutrients, and regulating pH and
blood pressure. This organ exhibits regional dependence on
energy substrate preference, with the proximal tubules in the
renal cortex relying on the oxidation of free fatty acids to generate large amounts of ATP to accommodate the high level of
water and solute transport occurring at this location (indeed, the
complete β-oxidation of a fatty acid molecule is more energetically lucrative than glucose oxidation—for example, the 16-
carbon fatty acid palmitate will yield 106 ATP versus ∼32 ATP
per glucose molecule). The lower O2 environment of the medulla
and distal tubules relies instead on glucose for glycolysis (Alsahli
and Gerich, 2017; Bhargava and Schnellmann, 2017). These
variances in energy preferences across organs, locally within
tissues, and under different circumstances thus raise the possibility that fluctuations in local availability of a range of energy
substrates may alter intracellular energy status to then activate
EMS in a substrate-tailored and location-dependent manner.
Metabolically driven release of mediators. Increased metabolic
activity may also drive the release of canonical vasodilatory
mediators from active tissue. These may include (but are not
limited to) adenosine, which is a direct product of the breakdown of ATP via ADP and AMP and is released in the brain (Wall
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 11 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
and Dale, 2008; Wu et al., 2023), skeletal muscle (Hellsten et al.,
1998), and heart during increased activity (Hori and Kitakaze,
1991); K+ which, while not a direct metabolic byproduct, is released during action potentials and thus accurately reflects local
activity in electrically active tissues (Ballanyi et al., 1996;
Rasmussen et al., 2019); and NO, a diffusible gas which is produced in response to Ca2+ elevations in metabolically active tissues such as the brain (Garthwaite, 2019) and skeletal muscle
(Stamler and Meissner, 2001). The documentation of metabolically driven mediators is underway in a range of tissues, and a
full accounting of these will be necessary to gain a complete
understanding of the diverse EMS mechanisms throughout tissues, several of which may operate in parallel to ensure
the fidelity of energy delivery in response to changes in local
metabolism. One mediator that is a direct product of metabolism and is therefore well suited for EMS is lactate.
Lactate as a signaling molecule. Pyruvate generated during
glycolysis can be metabolized by LDH enzymes to lactic acid
which ionizes to form lactate, at the same time generating NAD+.
This is a reversible reaction in which lactate and NAD+ can also
be converted into NADH and pyruvate. In the brain, the reversibility of this reaction forms the basis of the ANLS model,
although observations of lactate flux favoring brain exit to the
circulation have questioned the extent to which this mechanism
is favored for neuronal ATP generation (Dienel, 2012). Nevertheless, lactate levels in the brain clearly do increase during
activity (Prichard et al., 1991; Hu and Wilson, 1997a, 1997b), and
interestingly the activity of KATP channels in neocortical neurons has been shown to be modulated by the level of extracellular lactate, with its accumulation inhibiting KATP channels
composed of Kir6.2 and SUR1 subunits after its transport into
cells and subsequent metabolism, thus depolarizing the cell
membrane and increasing firing rate (Karagiannis et al., 2021).
Intriguingly, activation of vascular KATP channels by intracellular lactate has been observed in SMCs (Han et al., 1993), resulting instead in membrane hyperpolarization. These disparate
observations raise the need for further work to determine the
precise fate of lactate in the brain and delineate the responses of
different cells of the neurovascular unit to local extra- and intracellular lactate levels and establish underlying mechanisms.
One consistent observation, however, is that accumulation of
lactate causes vasodilation of local arterioles and arterioleproximate capillaries through several mechanisms including
modulation of contractile pericyte Ca2+ (Yamanishi et al., 2006),
nitric oxide (NO)–dependent activation of vascular KATP channels (Hein et al., 2006), and the actions of extracellular prostaglandin E2 (Gordon et al., 2008). While further work is needed to
determine the relative contributions of these mechanisms to
blood flow control in arterioles and throughout the capillary bed,
these observations suggest that the increases in lactate that occur in the brain during concerted activity can be sensed by the
vasculature and converted into hyperemia, thus fitting the
profile of an EMS signaling molecule.
Beyond the flow of brain lactate into the vascular system, the
levels of lactate in the blood are strongly correlated to the level of
lactate in working muscle, and a major fate of this molecule is to
be transported to the liver where it is used to synthesize glucose
or glycogen through the processes of gluconeogenesis and glyconeogenesis (Rui, 2014). However, it is also evident that circulating lactate can be directly taken up by cells as a carbon
source (Quistorff et al., 2020) and this raises the possibility
of whole-organism activity and energy state regulating EMS
broadly throughout a number of tissues. For example, during
intense whole-animal activity, the release of lactate could act as
an EMS trigger in skeletal muscle as noted in the previous section, and the increase in circulating lactate could also drive EMS
through its import into the heart (Duncker and Bache, 2008) and
brain, if the blood concentration is sufficiently high enough to
favor influx (Quistorff et al., 2020). Such a mechanism for lactate triggering coordinated blood flow increases across multiple
organs could serve to rapidly optimize energy delivery during
activity and represents an intriguing avenue for further
exploration.
Gases as metabolic indicators: pO2 and pCO2. Oxidative metabolic pathways converge on the generation of acetyl-coA in the
mitochondria for further metabolic processing via the TCA cycle
to generate electron donors for the ETC, with O2 acting as the
ultimate electron acceptor resulting in its reduction to H2O. This
process of electron transfer generates a large H+ gradient across
the inner mitochondrial membrane, culminating in the generation of ATP through the activity of the ATP synthase (Fig. 2). As
oxidative phosphorylation is dependent on O2, its local partial
pressure (pO2) can dictate the energy production means of the
cell and thus exert influence over the metabolic state.
It is well established that hypoxia acts as a potent vasodilatory stimulus, and seminal studies have demonstrated that
arterial diameter can be bidirectionally modulated as an inverse
function of local pO2 (Jackson, 2016). However, as has been
extensively discussed elsewhere (Taggart and Wray, 1998;
Jackson, 2016), the precise molecular mechanisms through
which decreases in pO2 trigger dilations are not known. Is also
unknown whether hypoxia engages electrical signaling in the
capillary bed, but it seems possible that similar mechanisms to
those evoking arteriolar smooth muscle hyperpolarization may
have evolved in this region of the vasculature to facilitate
communication upstream to control arteriole and proximal
capillary diameter and regulate blood flow in response to local
O2 fluctuations.
In the brain, state-of-the-art measurements of pO2 have recently challenged the controversial view that hyperemiainduced increases in local pO2 are preceded by an initial dip
(Kim et al., 2000; Logothetis, 2000; Buxton, 2001; Lindauer
et al., 2001b; Vanzetta and Grinvald, 2001; Thompson et al.,
2003, 2004; Kasischke et al., 2004; Dunn et al., 2005;
Offenhauser et al., 2005; Sirotin et al., 2009; Hu and Yacoub,
2012; Ma et al., 2016; Aydin et al., 2022), which has been postulated to be driven by increased neuronal metabolism during
activity. Instead, recent data support the view that O2 tension is
initially unchanged by the initiation of neuronal activity and is
then followed by a large influx in O2 during hyperemia (Aydin
et al., 2022). Furthermore, classic positron-emission tomography
experiments have convincingly demonstrated that activityevoked increases in neuronal activity are not associated with
significant increases in O2 consumption but are accompanied by
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 12 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
increased glucose utilization—leading to the hypothesis that
aerobic glycolysis predominates as a mechanism to rapidly
supply energy during sudden increases in brain activity (Raichle
and Mintun, 2006). Accordingly, it appears unlikely that changes
in local pO2 would operate as a trigger of EMS in this organ.
However, in tissues that routinely experience local or global
periods of anaerobic work (e.g., exercising skeletal muscle), pO2
could be an important driver of EMS. Taking the example of
skeletal muscle further, the energetic demands imposed by intensive work here lead to periods in which O2 demand outstrips
supply. In addition to the immediate and rapid ATP supply
provided by the skeletal muscle phosphagen system, glycolysis
predominates during such periods due to the rate at which it can
be rapidly ramped up to produce ATP. Mitochondrial respiration
is comparatively slow as a means of energy production (Baker
et al., 2010), and the decline in intracellular pO2 imposed by the
high energetic demand imposed by intense exercise (Richardson
et al., 1995; Wagner, 2012) will reduce the ability of this system to
supply ATP to meet local needs. During such periods, decreased
intracellular pO2 may act as a direct trigger of EMS by increasing
the production or availability of feed-forward hyperpolarizing/
vasodilating molecules such as prostaglandins and NO (Jackson,
2016). However, the mechanisms for O2-dependent production
of these mediators are not clear and require further experimental attention, but it has been speculated that prostaglandin
production may involve O2-dependent oxidation and inhibition
of upstream cyclooxygenase enzymes (Jackson, 2016).
An interesting layer of pO2-mediated blood flow control can
also be envisioned for extended bouts of hypoxia, where transcriptional changes evoked by the engagement of hypoxiainducible factor (HIF-1; Majmundar et al., 2010; Yuan et al.,
2013) could serve to tune EMS elements and modulate the sensitivity of this system. HIF-1 consists of HIF-1α and HIF-1β subunits, which respond to hypoxia by modulating the expression
of >100 downstream genes (Weidemann and Johnson, 2008;
Masoud and Li, 2015). Notably, hypoxia has been associated with
HIF-1–mediated upregulation of Kir6.1/SUR2 KATP channel expression (Raeis et al., 2010). A resultant increase in functional
protein at the membrane surface could thus serve to amplify
EMS responses in the affected tissue. Moreover, HIF-mediated
increases in Kir2.1 (central to EMS signal transmission, see below)
have also been reported (Yamamura et al., 2018). Further work is
needed to survey the tissue locations and circumstances in which
drops in pO2 act to promote vasodilation and to establish the
precise molecular mechanisms through which this leads ultimately to SMC membrane hyperpolarization and vasodilation.
Exploring the full impact of hypoxia on EMS signaling pathways is
thus an intriguing avenue for experimental investigation.
An obligate byproduct of aerobic metabolic activity is CO2,
which is produced during the cyclical processing of citrate to
oxaloacetate during the TCA cycle. As a gas, CO2 diffuses from its
point source of production and is ultimately removed from the
blood. Accordingly, CO2 readily passes through the SMCs, ECs,
and pericytes of the vasculature, which may have intrinsic
mechanisms to detect local pCO2. In addition to binding to deoxygenated RBCs and being secreted via ventilation, a major
fate of CO2 is to be processed by the large family of carbonic
anhydrase metalloenzymes, which catalyze the interconversion
of CO2 and H2O to carbonic acid (H2CO3) which can, in turn,
dissociate to form bicarbonate ions (HCO3−) and protons (H+).
Normally, pCO2 in the tissue is tightly controlled at around 40
mmHg (Patel and Sharma, 2023). During an increase in oxidative metabolic activity, the increase in CO2 generated can result
in an increase in H+ concentration, decreasing pH. The cerebral
circulation is remarkably sensitive to CO2-induced acidification,
with most vessels exhibiting rapid dilation to acidosis through
multiple mechanisms detailed below and as such, hypercapnia
produces robust blood flow responses in the brain and appears
to play a major role in the process of neurovascular coupling
(Hosford et al., 2022). At the arteriolar level, a central mechanism through which this occurs is the conversion of cytosolic Ca2+
waves to Ca2+ sparks in SMCs which activate large-conductance
Ca2+ activated K+ (BK) channels to hyperpolarize the membrane
(Dabertrand et al., 2012), likely through a decrease in the open
probability of ryanodine receptors (RyRs) in the sarcoplasmic
reticulum (Wray and Burdyga, 2010). H+ ions can also decrease the activity of L-type voltage-dependent Ca2+ channels
(VDCCs; West et al., 1992), increase the generation of NO
(Lindauer et al., 2001a), and stimulate KATP channels (Wang
et al., 2003). An exception to these responses in the cerebral
circulation is the arterioles of the brainstem retrotrapezoid
nucleus, a key chemosensory region responsible for regulating ventilation in response to changes in blood pH (Cleary
et al., 2020). Here, CO2 drives a decrease in vessel diameter,
which is thought to concentrate the CO2/H+ stimulus for
chemosensing neurons, thus ensuring a more robust increase
in ventilation to clear excess CO2.
The circulation in a range of peripheral organs also exhibits
sensitivity to hypercapnia. In the coronary vasculature, stimulation of NO generation is thought to play an important role in
mediating dilation in response to increased pCO2 (Heintz et al.,
2005; Tzou et al., 2007), and similar mechanisms have been
suggested in the brachial artery (de Matthaeis et al., 2014). In the
mesenteric arteries of the intestines, hypercapnic vasodilation
has been attributed to KATP channel engagement promoting
membrane hyperpolarization (Wang et al., 2003). In skeletal
muscle, as discussed above, acidosis and increases in CO2 up to
10% cause vasodilation and elevate blood flow (Lamb et al., 1966;
Charter et al., 2018). In the kidney, which plays a central role in
acid-base balance of the blood stream, hypercapnia instead induces vasoconstrictor responses and decreases renal blood flow
through mechanisms that have not been fully clarified but appear to involve activation of the renal nerve (Norman et al., 1970;
Chapman et al., 2020). Thus, in the context of EMS CO2 likely
plays distinct tissue-dependent roles, with many organs (brain,
heart, skeletal muscle) equipped to respond to increases in CO2/
H+ and resultant acidosis by generating membrane hyperpolarization to increase blood flow.
Redox state. Reactive oxygen species (ROS) are highly reactive O2-containing molecules that are generated during oxidative phosphorylation in mitochondria through electron leak,
resulting in the reduction of molecular O2, and by NADPH oxidases in the cytosol. ROS play important physiological signaling
roles within cells and common species include superoxide anion
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 13 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
radicals (O2·
−), hydroxyl radicals (·OH), and nonradical oxidants
such as hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) and singlet oxygen (1
O2). In
addition to their roles in varied processes such as signal transduction and control of gene expression (Nose, 2000; Forman
et al., 2010; Checa and Aran, 2020), during heightened activity
ROS production can exceed the capacity of antioxidant mechanisms in the cell, allowing these molecules to build to disruptive
levels. This accumulation damages DNA and proteins and interferes with the operation of important signaling pathways
such as NO-mediated communication (Forstermann, 2010 ¨ ; Checa
and Aran, 2020). Redox homeostasis is thus a critical factor in
ensuring the continued smooth functioning of cells on a moment-to-moment basis.
Interestingly, important roles for NADPH oxidases 2 and 4
(NOX2; NOX4)—key sources of cytosolic ROS—in endothelialdependent vasodilation have been reported. In cerebral arteries,
endothelial NOX2 is associated with transient receptor potential ankyrin 1 (TRPA1) channels, which respond to NOX2-
derived ROS with Ca2+ signals that couple to EC small- and
intermediate-conductance Ca2+-activated K+ channels to produce
vasodilation (Sullivan et al., 2015). Importantly, TRPA1 channels
in capillary endothelial cells have also recently been shown to
contribute the capillary-to-arteriole electrical signaling in the
brain (Thakore et al., 2021), raising the possibility for ROSinitiated long-distance communication within the vasculature.
NOX4 has also been observed in ECs (and also appears to be
expressed by some pericytes [He et al., 2018; Vanlandewijck
et al., 2018]) and has been proposed to drive membrane hyperpolarization through the generation of H2O2 (Ray et al., 2011),
which promotes the activity of KATP and Ca2+-activated K+
channels (Bychkov et al., 1999; Matoba et al., 2000; Dantzler
et al., 2019). As H2O2 is able to readily permeate membranes, it
could also act as an intercellular indicator of redox status and as a
signaling molecule, although its brief half-life likely limits its
active range prior to decomposition (Lennicke et al., 2015; Ledo
et al., 2022). These observations support the possibility that
changes in tissue redox state brought about by increases in oxidative metabolism or membrane NADPH oxidase activity may
couple directly to electrical activity, which in the vasculature
could be translated into increases in blood flow. The resultant
incoming blood might not only provide further energy substrates
for metabolism but could also serve a homeostatic function by
delivering circulating antioxidant molecules to active tissues to
redress redox balance. Experiments involving direct measurements of ROS levels during tissue activity changes, and manipulation of their levels in conjunction with blood flow measurements
are needed to test these ideas which likely necessitates the development of new and more sensitive indicators.
The foregoing provides a non-exhaustive outline of known
and unexplored but potentially important EMS triggers. Following the triggering event, a membrane electrical signal must
next be generated that can ultimately influence blood flow.
Stage II: Chemical-to-electrical transduction and propagation
mechanisms underpin EMS
Upon detection of biochemical changes resulting from elevated
metabolic activity in a tissue, the second stage of EMS centers on
the conversion of this initiating factor into an electrical signal in
the vasculature that can propagate to reach from the initiation
site through multiple vessel branches to contractile mural cells
(Box 1). Alternatively, the process of electrical signal generation
could also occur directly in arterioles if the initiating cells are
suitably proximal, although, in general, this is likely to be secondary, simply due to the relative paucity of spatial coverage by
arterioles and the much more extensive arborization of the
capillaries that forms the bulk of the vasculature throughout all
tissues (Fig. 4). This close association with working cells thus
ideally positions capillaries as the primary sensors and responders to local activity (Gould et al., 2017).
K+ channels as signal generators. In many excitable cells,
electrical signaling takes the form of regenerative, propagating
depolarizations that characterize action potentials (e.g., cardiac
myocytes, neurons, pancreatic β cells, and gut smooth muscle)
generated by Na+- or Ca2+-permeable channels. In the vasculature, the organization of electrical signaling could be conceived
of as being “inverted,” with the dominant role played by hyperpolarizations generated through K+ channel activity. Below,
we outline studies supporting this conception of electrical signaling throughout the vasculature.
KATP channels generate signals in response to energy
deficits. Recently, we found that KATP channels take center stage
in generating electrical signals in capillaries, which are then
transmitted over long distances during EMS in the brain and
heart. In the brain, the pericytes found on the abluminal wall of
the capillaries greatly extend the sensory capabilities of the
vessels by imbuing them with the ability to directly respond to
the availability of local glucose (see Stage I, above) and likely a
broad range of other signals through their repertoire of G
protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) and ion channels (Hariharan
et al., 2020). Analysis of recent brain single-cell RNAseq data
revealed that KATP channels account for nearly half of the total
expression of all ion channel genes in these pericytes (Hariharan
et al., 2020) and acts as a reliable marker of these cells in mice
(He et al., 2018; Vanlandewijck et al., 2018). These channels are
also expressed by human pericytes (Crouch et al., 2022; Yang
et al., 2022; although note that not all studies find enrichment of
KATP genes in humans [Song et al., 2020]) and have recently
been shown to be functional in mouse brain and retinal pericytes (Sancho et al., 2022). We thus examined the role of these
channels in pericyte-mediated control of blood flow and strikingly, our studies suggest that the electrical signal resulting from
the activation of KATP channels in a single pericyte is capable of
exerting robust control of upstream capillaries covered by
contractile pericytes and arterioles and can be triggered by a fall
in local glucose availability (Hariharan et al., 2022). This KATP
channel-dependent basis for EMS extends to other tissues, with
a variant having initially been detected by us in the heart (Zhao
et al., 2020a), where KATP channels positioned in cardiac myocytes are electrically coupled to adjacent capillary ECs. Here, as
the work of cardiac myocytes increases, impacting intracellular
energy status, KATP channel open probability increases, and this
drives membrane hyperpolarization which is likely passed via a
small number of gap junctions from the cardiac myocyte to
its surrounding capillaries. From here, the signal can spread
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 14 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
throughout the vasculature to modulate blood flow (Longden
et al., 2023). Similar mechanisms may also operate in other
tissues in which KATP channels play important signaling roles
such as the pancreas or skeletal muscle. Accordingly, we posit
that KATP channels activated by a wide variety of metabolic
signals (see Stage I) operate as the central node in the EMS
signaling network generating electrical signals to influence
blood flow.
In addition to KATP channels, other K+ channels known to be
expressed throughout the vasculature might also contribute to
electrical signal generation. For example, in the arteriolar endothelium, small- and intermediate-conductance Ca2+-activated
Figure 4. EMS transmission mechanisms. (A) Comparison of the vascular volume in a 1 mm3 block of cortical tissue comprised by surface arteries, penetrating arterioles, and the capillary bed. Capillaries comprise about 85% of the vasculature by volume, with the penetrating arterioles contributing just 3%.
Thus, the capillaries are ideally positioned to act as a sensory array communicating information on tissue activity to the arterioles to regulate blood flow.
Adapted with permission from Gould et al. (2017). (B) The central image depicts an arteriole lined by arterial endothelial cells (aECs) and surrounded by smooth
muscle cells (SMCs). Downstream of this emerge capillaries, the proximal branches of which are covered in contractile pericytes. Deeper downstream branches
are covered by thin-strand pericytes. The dotted box depicts events leading to the initiation of EMS in the capillary bed, leading to the generation and
transmission of hyperpolarizing signals. In inset i (middle), a specific example is given for a decrease in glucose availability based on Hariharan et al. (2022),
which engages KATP channels. This hyperpolarization can be passed via gap junctions (GJs) into the underlying capillary endothelial cells (cECs), which may then
transmit the signal upstream via the mechanism depicted in inset ii (bottom). Here, hyperpolarization in the endothelium relieves the voltage-dependent block
of Kir2.1 channels by polyamines, leading to K+ efflux and regeneration of membrane hyperpolarization through the engagement of further Kir2.1 channels as
the signal travels upstream. Once it arrives in the proximal capillaries and arteriolar segment (inset iii, top), the electrical signal can be transmitted via gap
junctions into both the contractile pericytes and upstream SMCs, where its arrival decreases the open probability of voltage-dependent Ca2+ channels and
produces a decrease in intracellular Ca2+ which relaxes the Ca2+-sensitive contractile machinery and promotes vasodilation and an increase in blood flow.
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 15 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
K+ channels are engaged during Ca2+ elevations. The resultant
hyperpolarization can be transmitted to the underlying SMCs
via gap junction-containing myo-endothelial projections—
specialized points of contact between ECs and SMCs through the
fenestrated internal elastic lamina of these vessels. These
channels may thus also contribute to EMS as signal generators or
boosters, and further work is needed to address whether this is
the case. Yet other K+ channel isoforms in the endothelium,
pericytes, and smooth muscle (e.g., KV and BK channels in the
latter [Brayden and Nelson, 1992; Straub et al., 2009; Jackson,
2017]) could also contribute to this process. It is also possible that
some capillary conducted responses may be fully or partially
Ca2+-mediated. For example, recent work (Thakore et al., 2021)
has shown TRPA1-initiated Ca2+ signals spreading throughout
capillaries—via pannexin hemichannel release of ATP in turn
activating P2X receptors on endothelial cells—at ∼35 µm/s, ultimately activating SK and IK channels which then generate
electrical signals for the upstream arteriole.
Kir2.1 channels mediate signal propagation through the
vasculature. Once a hyperpolarizing electrical signal has been
generated in response to metabolic activity, it must be
transmitted—in some cases over long distances—to reach upstream capillaries and arterioles covered with contractile cells
(Box 1) to drive their relaxation. In the brain, we initially
characterized this process in capillary ECs, which express the
strong-inward rectifier K+ (Kir2.1) channel (Longden and Nelson,
2015; Longden et al., 2017; Harraz et al., 2018a; Moshkforoush
et al., 2020). This channel responds directly to both increases in
external K+ and, importantly, hyperpolarization (Longden and
Nelson, 2015). These stimuli can relieve the voltage-dependent
block of Kir2.1 channels by the positively charged intracellular
polyamines (such as spermine and putrescine) and Mg2+ that
produce their characteristic inwardly rectifying current–voltage
relationship. The blocking process here likely results from a
combination of charge screening through the interaction of
polyamines with key residues in the channels’ inner vestibule
outlined above, lowering the K+ permeation rate, along with
direct pore occlusion at more depolarized potentials (Xie et al.,
2002). The process of blockade relief by K+ elevation and/or an
initial hyperpolarization can generate a feed-forward effect
that—if it overcomes the background depolarizing conductances
of the cell (Tsoukias et al., 2007)—can rapidly drive the membrane potential to close to the K+ equilibrium potential (EK)
through K+ efflux (Longden and Nelson, 2015). These properties
of Kir2.1 and its expression throughout the capillary endothelium form the basis for a minimal regenerative electrical signaling system that allows for the long-range transmission of
hyperpolarizations. Conceptually, injection of sufficient current
into an endothelial cell at any point in a capillary network could
be passed via gap junctions (likely composed of connexins 43 and
45; He et al., 2018; Vanlandewijck et al., 2018; Hariharan et al.,
2020) into adjacent endothelial cells where it can regenerate
itself through the unblocking of resident Kir2.1 channels in the
next cell. In principle, this process can generate electrical signals
that can traverse long vascular distances to reach the upstream
supplying arteriole to drive (Fig. 4). Evidence for such a capillary-to-arteriole signaling system has now been provided by a
number of studies in both brain and heart (Longden et al., 2017,
2023; Zhao et al., 2020a; Hariharan et al., 2022), and similar
findings have emerged in skeletal muscle (Lamb et al., 2018).
Moreover, studies in arterioles have provided evidence for longrange conduction at this level of the vascular bed (Emerson and
Segal, 2001), and these electrical signals can be readily transferred from ECs to SMCs (Yamamoto et al., 1999; Sonkusare
et al., 2016). It is likely that similar mechanisms operate in
other tissues and further studies are needed to address this
possibility.
The heart is distinct from the brain in that direct current
injection from the cardiac myocyte through a sparse set of gap
junctions could provide a low-pass filtered current source for
hyperpolarizing or depolarizing changes in capillary voltage.
Direct measurements of voltage are needed in all cell types, and
implementing novel imaging tools such as genetically encoded
voltage indicators to enable these measurements is therefore
essential.
Together, the K+ channels that act as signal generators for
EMS—primarily KATP channels—pass signals on to the Kir2.1
channels that mediate distance transmission of electrical signals
through the vascular network to enable the precise delivery of
blood to the tissue in the third and final stage of this process.
Stage III: Hyperpolarizing electrical signaling adjusts blood flow as
the homeostatic output of EMS
After its transmission through the capillary network, an electrical signal will arrive at vascular branches covered with contractile cells—either contractile pericytes in the proximal
branches of the capillary bed or SMCs covering arterioles and
arteries. The mechanisms governing contractile pericyte contraction and relaxation have not been elucidated in detail, but
given their expression of α-SMA (Box 1) and the presence of
functional VDCCs (Gonzales et al., 2020), these are likely to be
relatively similar to those of upstream SMCs, which we focus on
here (although it is noteworthy that differences in the ion
channel complement and relative expression of several proteins
have been reported between these two cell types which likely
contribute to functional differences [Gonzales et al., 2020;
Ratelade et al., 2020]).
In SMCs, the interplay between membrane potential and
intracellular Ca2+ is critically important. An electrical signal
arriving at the arteriolar endothelium can be readily transferred to the smooth muscle via gap junction-containing
myoendothelial projections, as noted above. This handover of
hyperpolarization in turn will close L-type voltage-gated Ca2+
channels (VGCCs) embedded in the sarcolemma, which in turn
decreases global intracellular Ca2+. In SMCs, global Ca2+ levels
are sensed by calmodulin, which influences the activity of myosin light chain kinase, which transfers phosphates from ATP to
the myosin head group to enable its interaction with actin fibers
in the process of actin–myosin crossbridge cycling. Accordingly,
a fall in Ca2+ in the SMC resulting from VGCC closure will interrupt this process, leading to a relaxation of the contractile
machinery. This process playing out through many cells along
the length of the vessel in response to a vasodilatory stimulus
leads to dilation of the arteriole and an increase in blood flow.
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 16 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
The magnitude and reach of an arriving electrical signal will
determine the resolution of the blood flow response. Here, the
steep relationship between membrane potential and SMC tone
will dictate the size of the resultant diameter change. In pressurized cerebral arteries, SMC membrane potential is roughly
−40 mV under resting conditions (Knot and Nelson, 1998),
which closely aligns also with the resting potentials of capillary
endothelial cells and pericytes (Hariharan et al., 2022; Sancho
et al., 2022). At −60 mV, these arteries are almost maximally
dilated, and thus arriving signals with a magnitude within this
20-mV range produce a nearly linear effect on vessel diameter
which exponentially amplifies blood flow as a product of the
fourth power of the vessel radius, as described by the HagenPoiseuille equation. This voltage–diameter relationship is well
supported in cerebral arteries and has also been explored in
detail in arteries from hamster cheek pouch and intestine (Xia
and Duling, 1998) and skeletal muscle (Wolfle et al., 2011 ¨ ). Indeed, in the latter, vessels are maximally constricted at approximately −35 mV and maximally dilated at approximately
−50 mV, further illustrating the incredibly sensitive relationship
between vessel diameter and membrane voltage (Kotecha and
Hill, 2005). It will be important to fully elucidate these relationships for arterioles controlling blood flow to capillary beds in
each tissue of interest, as differences in expression and environment may influence their range, linearity, and steepness
which consequently shapes the hemodynamic response.
If a signal is transmitted from capillaries in a metabolically
active area to a feed arteriole that has multiple capillary offshoots along its length, the bulk increase in blood flow through
the artery in response to its dilation could be expected to be
distributed throughout all capillaries emanating from this vessel
(Fig. 5). In contrast, if a signal reaches only the contractile
pericyte-covered capillary nearest to its point of origin (i.e.,
reaches the proximal capillaries but not the arteriole itself),
the blood flow increase resulting from the dilating capillary
would be expected to be much smaller and more localized, being
a product of the dilating capillary diverting blood away from
other areas of the network by modifying the path-of-least-resistance for flow (and absent a global increase in blood flow
elicited by dilating the feed arteriole). Thus, the resolution of the
blood delivery through the capillary network (i.e., the number of
branches experiencing hyperemia) is predicted to be a function
of the reach (i.e., length constant) and magnitude of electrical
signals, assuming no changes in other ongoing processes (Fig. 5).
However, the α-SMA-expressing precapillary sphincters found
at the point of transition from arteriole to capillary in multiple
capillary beds including those of the brain (He et al., 2010; Grubb
et al., 2020), heart (Anderson and Anderson, 1980), and skeletal
muscle (Rhodin, 1967) also likely play an important role in
controlling hyperemic resolution at this level of the vascular tree
through moment-to-moment modification of their contractile
state. An electrical signal arriving from a capillary tree in an
active area of tissue is expected to open the gateway sphincter as
it passes into the arteriole, while other sphincters controlling
flow to other non-electrically active capillary networks fed by
the same arteriole remain closed. This would accordingly promote a preferential distribution of blood to the capillaries in the
active region downstream of the relaxing sphincter. As long as
the sphincters controlling the access of blood to other capillary
offshoots remain constricted at the same time, this should amplify blood flow to the electrically active capillaries while minimizing the perturbation of flow through capillaries in areas that
are not currently generating EMS signals. There are likely even
more mechanisms for modifying flow pathways through the
capillaries. For example, signals inducing slow or tonic constrictions of thin-strand pericytes (Fernandez-Klett et al., 2010 ´ ;
Hartmann et al., 2021) may selectively narrow certain vessels to
alter the path of least resistance through the capillary bed over
longer time scales. Furthermore, data indicating that contractile
pericytes located at branch points can independently regulate
perfusion through the daughter branches they cover suggest
that the regulation of blood distribution is highly complex and
controlled at multiple levels (Gonzales et al., 2020). Fully
studying all such possibilities will be necessary to arrive at a
model that captures the complexity of the regulation of blood
flow through capillary networks. It is also interesting to consider
that electrical signals arriving at the venous side of the vasculature could be an important component of EMS. Detailed
information on the flow of electrical signals through threedimensional vascular networks in combination with dynamic
tissue activity, vessel diameter, and blood flow measurements is
thus a critically important development that is needed to fully
understand exactly how these blood delivery issues are handled
across tissues and under varying metabolic loads.
The shape of the blood flow response will be influenced thus
by the length constant of an electrical signal, and also its magnitude and duration. In vivo, the duration of arriving electrical
signals will likely differ depending on the tissue, the type of
activity for which blood is being supplied, and the specific molecular setup of the local vasculature, among other factors.
Broadly, electrical signaling could operate in either analog or
digital modes. In the brain, present data suggest that the electrical signaling component of EMS in response to local activity
most closely resembles a digital electrical signal (Fig. 4), which
propagates in a regenerative fashion through the vasculature to
drive upstream dilation and increase blood flow. These signals
have rapid on- and off-kinetics and their duration is tied closely
to the length of the stimulus. This digital signal analogy is supported by data indicating an all-or-none property of electrical
signaling through brain capillaries, in that stimuli below K+
concentrations of 7 mM are ineffective in changing arteriole
diameter, whereas K+ concentrations above this concentration
evoke near-maximal dilation of the upstream arteriole (Longden
et al., 2017). This behavior can be explained from the perspective
of the Kir channel by introducing a bistable membrane potential
with points of stability at EK when channels are fully active
and the resting membrane potential when they are closed
(Moshkforoush et al., 2020). Similarly, the transfer of signals
along lengths of arterial tissue has been studied in detail, and
this work reveals the conduction of electrical signals along the
endothelium which is largely sustained at distances of up to
2 mm, suggesting an active regeneration mechanism (Emerson
and Segal, 2000, 2001), which is readily transferred laterally to
the smooth muscle (Yamamoto et al., 1999).
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 17 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
Figure 5. Electrical signal length constants and resolution of blood flow control. Concepts are depicted for brain vasculature. Similar principles likely
apply in other organs, modified by specific angioarchitectural features and molecular configurations. (A) Brain vasculature. Top: Top-down view showing
overlapping pial (surface) arterial and veinous networks. Bottom: Side-view showing a pial artery transitioning to a penetrating arteriole as it dives into the
brain and gives way to the capillary network. Left inset: Neurovascular unit at the initial capillaries surrounded by contractile pericytes. Right inset:
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 18 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
In other tissues and in other tissue activity scenarios, a form
of analog signaling could predominate. From a biophysical perspective, such signaling would be by its nature non-regenerative
and non-propagative and could instead be organized around the
electrotonic conduction of potentials according to the cable
properties of the local vessels. Possible molecular configurations
that would enable such a signal would be a capillary bed that
receives electrical input via gap junctions from either parenchymal cells or overlying pericytes acting as signal generators,
while at the same time lacking a high density of Kir channels in
the ECs. Without a regenerative mechanism to amplify and
propagate the signal, a voltage change would instead exponentially decay as a function of vessel distance, the degree of
membrane leak, and the size of other “background” conductances. EMS operating in this mode would thus give rise to
signals that are a more direct function of the amplitude and
duration of the initiating metabolic stimulus and would as a
result likely operate over slower and more local time scales and
shape the blood flow response accordingly (Fig. 5).
The incoming blood that results from these dilations initiated
by EMS performs multiple homeostatic functions. In addition to
the delivery of energy substrates and O2, CO2, lactate, and other
waste products generated during metabolic activity are removed
(Fig. 1), and in the process pH and temperature of the tissue may
be regulated also. Accordingly, the increase in metabolic activity
in the tissue is compensated for and deviations in intracellular
energy state (i.e., changes in ATP:ADP ratio) are reversed, effectively matching energy demand to supply and ensuring continued
optimal function of the tissue.
Taken together, the three stages of the EMS hypothesis outlined above provide a mechanistic framework enabling the accurate and timely coupling of energy supply through blood flow
to local metabolic needs in highly active tissues. We postulate
that EMS variants operate in all tissues with high energy consumption (e.g., brain, heart, kidney, skeletal muscle) and likely
also in other areas and that this precise matching helps to ensure
the health and function of local cells on a moment-to-moment
basis across long periods of time.
EMS uncoupling as a mediator of aging
We posit that EMS plays a key role in matching the energetic
demands of varied physiological processes with precise moment-to-moment energy substrate delivery via the blood. It thus
follows that processes that disrupt EMS would be detrimental to
overall tissue function, stemming from an inability to meet
ongoing energetic demands. Aging is one such process that could
degrade EMS and is characterized by a panoply of functional
changes that result in overall organismal decline. A number of
hallmarks of the aging process have been defined and these
include genomic instability, telomere attrition, epigenetic alterations, loss of proteostasis, disabled macroautophagy, deregulation of nutrient sensing, mitochondrial dysfunction, cellular
senescence, stem cell exhaustion, inflammation, dysbiosis, and
alterations to intercellular communication (López-Ot´ın et al.,
2023).
It is possible that age-related alterations to intercellular signaling (for example, due to the loss of cardiac and vascular KATP
channel function that has been documented in older animals
[Yang et al., 2016]) could be a proximate cause that deranges the
metabolic sensing or signal transmission aspects of EMS, which
would then be expected to contribute further to the aging process. It is not difficult to conceive that the reduced substrate
delivery emanating from impaired blood flow regulation due to
loss of EMS could then play into mitochondrial dysfunction and
thus exert an outsized impact on cellular energy status. Indeed,
many of the aging hallmarks outlined above depend on precise
control of energy generation and delivery. For example, altered
substrate availability will affect the activity of the mechanistic
target of the rapamycin (MTOR) complex which modulates the
activity of a range of transcription factors influencing the expression of elements that contribute to a huge number of core
cellular activities, including protein synthesis and proteasome
activity, autophagy, and metabolism (López-Ot´ın et al., 2023).
Accordingly, it seems feasible that age-related declines in EMS
could play a key role in aging through knock-on effects on
mechanisms that are at the heart of the aging process. By preventing EMS degradation over long time spans—for example
through the development of gerotherapies that preserve EMS
sensing, transduction, and propagation mechanisms—it may be
possible to preserve overall tissue and organ function and
slow aging.
EMS uncoupling as a driver of organ failure states
Our hypothesis places EMS at the center of blood flow modulation mechanisms in a range of tissues. Extending from the
foregoing, it follows that disease process-related breakdown of
EMS mechanisms could be an initiating factor in the mismatch
between energy supply and demand which then precipitates
metabolic failure states that compromise organ function and
lead to further pathology.
Organ function is intricately intertwined with metabolism,
and thus pathologies that disrupt metabolic function have wideranging and frequently disastrous effects. Metabolic syndrome
is highly prevalent, and in the US is estimated to affect ∼35% of
Neurovascular unit of the deep capillary bed with thin strand pericytes. EC, endothelial cell; GJ, gap junction; PSJ, peg-socket junction; RBC, red blood cell.
(B) Diameter–voltage relationship for a pial artery showing that maximal working range is controlled across ∼30 mV of membrane potential. Adapted with
permission from Knot and Nelson (1998). (C) Regenerative and passive signal transmission modes. Top: Theoretical signal transmission–distance relationships
for regenerative and passive signals. Regenerative mechanisms will conduct over greater lengths of vessel due to the signal being actively renewed. Bottom:
Graphical depiction of regenerative versus passive transmission modes. (D) The length constant of transmission, dictated by input amplitude and the electrical
properties of the local vasculature, will determine the resolution of blood flow control. Top: Activation of large areas of tissue will initiate large signals in the
vasculature that conduct over longer distances and induce more contractile cells to relax and produce a low-resolution blood flow increase that encompasses
many cells. Middle: Smaller metabolically active fields will evoke electrical signals with a shorter length constant, recruiting fewer vessels and evoking more
localized blood flow increases that perfuse a smaller tissue volume. Bottom: The smallest active regions may evoke a higher resolution blood flow increase still.
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 19 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
the population (Hirode and Wong, 2020). It consists of a group
of conditions that encompasses obesity, hypertension, and dyslipidemia among others which greatly increase the risk of developing diabetes, heart disease, and stroke, and is overall linked
to early death (Eckel et al., 2010). A major factor that promotes
the development of metabolic syndrome is a high-fat diet, and
interestingly, this has been associated with the impairment of a
wide range of elements that comprise the EMS mechanisms we
have identified. Specifically, a high-fat diet has been shown to
impair vascular KATP channel function (Fan et al., 2008, 2009)
and endothelial Kir2.1 function (Fancher et al., 2020; Ahn et al.,
2022), the two key EMS elements involved in the transduction of
metabolic signals to changes in membrane electrical activity and
transmission of electrical signals throughout the vasculature,
respectively. Moreover, vascular smooth muscle undergoes a
range of changes in obesity including an increase in the density
of voltage-gated Ca2+ channels which enhances contraction
(Owen et al., 2013), along with a decrease in BK channel function
(Borbouse et al., 2009), promoting hypertension and a decrease
in blood flow.
Such changes would be expected to weaken EMS by reducing
the ability to generate substantial electrical signals, while also
diminishing their propagation throughout the vasculature.
Weaker signals arriving at the arteriolar level would also encounter a higher basal contractile state, resulting from a higher
level of intracellular Ca2+ at a given membrane potential. This is
predicted to further limit the ability of the arriving hyperpolarization to drive a significant decrease in the level of intracellular Ca2+ to drive dilations and increase blood flow to
metabolically active regions. Accordingly, functional disruption
of EMS could be an early event that compounds issues locally
within the affected tissue driven by insufficient energy substrate delivery. Exploration of these possibilities will reveal the
extent of the contribution of EMS disruption to a range of pathologies in organs throughout the body.
The pancreas plays a central role in energy balance by controlling blood glucose levels through insulin secretion. As blood
glucose levels rise (e.g., postprandially) insulin secretion increases, which promotes glucose utilization, uptake, and storage.
Efficient microvascular function and tight control of blood flow
are accordingly essential to pancreatic function, and impairment
of pericyte and capillary signaling as well as structural microvascular abnormalities are early events in the pathogenesis of
diabetes. As such, the loss of blood flow control in pancreatic
islets could be a key event that impacts nutrient sensing, hormone release, and the timely control of glycemic status (Almaça
et al, 2018; Gonçalves et al, 2023). The resulting derangements in
insulin signaling and blood glucose levels in turn will have a
range of further effects that could compromise efficient energy
matching to local metabolic demands and contribute to multiorgan functional decline.
Heart failure is associated with metabolic changes that lead to
loss of efficient energy generation that contributes to profound
impairment of cardiac output. Accordingly, blood flow is disrupted throughout the body, further compounding any existing
energetic issues and creating novel problems associated with a
lack of proper substrate delivery. Due to these far-reaching
ramifications, heart failure is perceived as a complex, multiorgan syndrome with metabolic failure as the central driving
force (Rosano and Vitale, 2018). Under normal circumstances,
the heart predominantly oxidizes free fatty acids but also uses
glucose to produce the ATP needed for optimal function. In heart
failure, insulin resistance is thought to limit glucose utilization
and favor the use of free fatty acids for ketogenesis. This leads to
a reduction in the production of ATP in the heart, which in turn
contributes to a decline in the efficiency of cardiac output. This
is interwoven with other abnormal processes such as structural
changes and an increase in oxidative stress (Rosano and Vitale,
2018). After the onset of cardiac failure, activation of the sympathetic nervous system and renin–angiotensin system may also
trigger an increase in cytokines, angiotensin II, and free fatty
acids. The latter damages the pancreas, impairing insulin regulation of blood glucose and disrupting glucose handling by
skeletal muscle. The elevated angiotensin II can also drive
vasoconstriction—further impairing blood delivery—and hampered endothelial function has been noted in this context
(Ashrafian et al., 2007; Giannitsi et al., 2019). Activation of the
angiotensin AT1 receptor also produces ROS in the vessel wall
which could contribute to signaling processes under normal
conditions but may disrupt components of local EMS mechanisms when out of balance with antioxidants (Nickenig and
Harrison, 2002). Against this backdrop, impairment of EMS
may contribute to disturbed metabolic activity in the heart and
therefore the reduction of cardiac output and its downstream
effects. For example, disruption of KATP-mediated electrical
signaling from cardiac myocytes to ECs (Zhao et al., 2020a)
would be predicted to impair the tight matching of blood flow to
energy demand and therefore contribute to cardiac dysfunction.
Further work is needed to explore this possibility and the potential disruption of other aspects of EMS in the context of heart
disease.
Disruption of cerebral blood flow is thought to be one of the
earliest factors on the path to dementia, in some cases being
detectable decades before the onset of cognitive decline (IturriaMedina et al., 2016). This has been suggested as a watershed
moment that leads to a range of compounding consequences that
ultimately lead to neuronal dysfunction, death, and cognitive
decline. Indeed, it has been postulated that once a critical
threshold of cerebral hypoperfusion has been crossed, a panoply
of cellular issues ensue throughout the neurovascular unit
stemming from this disrupted energy balance (de la Torre,
2000a). These include the degeneration of pericytes (Sagare
et al., 2013; Halliday et al., 2016) and profound alterations to
endothelial (Wang et al., 2018) and smooth muscle cells
(Chabriat et al., 2009), leading, in turn, to further hemodynamic
impairments, increased generation of free radicals by starved
mitochondria, damage of cellular macromolecules, loss of control over membrane potential and ionic imbalance due to Na+/K+
ATPase dysfunction, derangements in Ca2+ handling, impacts on
gene expression, and impaired protein production, posttranslational modification, and trafficking (de la Torre, 2000b). Together, these mounting problems initially cause neuronal
dysfunction and lead ultimately to the death of the cell. As EMS
provides an essential link matching blood flow to neuronal
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 20 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
metabolic needs, subtle functional disturbances in this process
could divorce capillary electrical signaling from local metabolism and thus lead to mismatching between neuronal energy
supply and demand, driving the advancement of the cascade of
issues outlined above. Importantly, such disruptions could be
initiated in the brain capillaries themselves or could arise as the
result of dysfunction in other organs (e.g., pancreas and heart)
leading to inefficiencies in energy substrate supply that disrupt
brain metabolism. Studies taking an integrated multiorgan view
of the cascading effects that result from blood flow impairment
throughout the body are thus essential to explore the impacts of
energy substrate delivery impairment on integrated physiological functioning.
Outstanding questions and future directions
Our recent studies have revealed overlapping yet distinct EMS
mechanisms that operate in both the brain (Hariharan et al.,
2022; Longden et al., 2023) and heart (Zhao et al., 2020a;
Longden et al., 2023). Work in these systems offers a platform to
deepen our understanding EMS in these and other organs, and
here we outline the key outstanding questions at the present
juncture and the technological developments that will be necessary to gain a full understanding of this system and its contributions to health and disease.
Key questions to unlock a deeper understanding of EMS
What is the full range of organ systems that utilize EMS to
match blood flow to cellular metabolic demands? As noted above,
our work has revealed EMS mechanisms in the brain and heart,
but other organs with high energy demands remain unexplored.
Of particular note, the kidneys rank alongside the heart as the
joint-top organs with the highest resting energy expenditure
(Wang et al., 2010). The brain consumes around half as much
ATP “at rest,” followed closely by the liver, with skeletal muscle
and adipose tissue trailing these and accounting for only a small
fraction of basal metabolic rate. Of course, both individual brain
regions and skeletal muscles engage in dramatic changes in their
activity levels (i.e., when engaging in computations or contractions, respectively). Accordingly, it is important to investigate in detail the different types of EMS mechanisms operating
in these tissues and beyond, where variations and modifications
may provide insight into local metabolic regulation. For example, it is possible that EMS is absent in a tissue like the liver,
which maintains a large store of glycogen to draw upon to meet
its energy needs when glucose levels in the blood are low (Rui,
2014). In the kidney, the glomerular filtration rate is homeostatically controlled and is influenced by blood flow, increases in
which drive filtration, greater reabsorption, and increased
metabolic demands. Investigating whether other EMS mechanisms are at play in the kidney at the capillary and arteriolar
levels may yield further useful insights. By extension, surveying
the operation of EMS and its, similarities, differences, and
ramifications throughout all organs are important avenues for
future work.
What is the full range of metabolic triggers of EMS? Current
data suggest important roles for intracellular energy state
(i.e., ATP:ADP ratio) resulting from increased work and
decreased local energy substrate availability as triggering factors
in EMS. Moving forward, it will be important to determine the
full range of factors produced in response to metabolic deviations in eliciting electrical signaling through the vasculature and
their detailed mechanisms. For example, investigating the relationship between lactate and capillary electrical signaling is an
important and tractable set of experiments that is within easy
reach. Measurements of O2 tension in vivo are more difficult but
have been made possible by the development of elegant phosphorescent lifetime imaging approaches (Sakadzic et al., 2010 ´ ).
Improvements in the time resolution of these measurements
and their wider application will offer deeper insights into the
relationship between local O2 fluctuations and blood flow. Given
the huge complexity of biochemical pathways, the number of
potential factors that could engage EMS is vast, and mechanisms
could be tailored to elicit electrical responses from metabolic
processes that produce a wide array of metabolites and byproducts. Efforts to understand the breadth of these metabolic
signaling mechanisms and the specific mechanisms through
which they produce electrical signaling in the vasculature will
thus reveal insights into EMS in a range of contexts.
What is the full range of mechanisms that convert metabolic
load to blood flow elevations at the arteriolar and capillary
levels? Here, we have considered EMS mechanisms primarily
from the standpoint of propagated hyperpolarizations from
capillaries to arterioles. As discussed above, different mechanisms underlying these signals may be tailored to suit the particular blood flow needs of a given tissue. For example, the
kidney requires constant blood flow to enable optimal filtration,
and thus feedback mechanisms to maintain blood flow at a homeostatic set-point may dominate in this organ. In contrast,
heart, brain, and skeletal muscle all exhibit rapid changes in
activity and metabolism across various spatiotemporal domains
and thus the EMS mechanisms that have evolved are likely to be
specialized to meet their individual blood flow requirements.
Although in general arteriole coverage is sparser than the
reach of the capillary bed, it will be important alongside work in
capillaries to understand the EMS mechanisms operating directly in arterioles at the levels of the arteriolar endothelium and
in SMCs, which may have unique mechanisms to sense local
metabolic changes.
How does EMS breakdown contribute to aging and disease? Given
the suspected widespread nature of EMS signaling, the potential
for contribution to aging and to a range of disease processes is
extensive. Aging is characterized by a general decline in function during adulthood. Given the essential need of all organ
systems to match metabolic needs with energy delivery through
tightly controlled blood flow, it is possible that disruption of
EMS makes a key contribution to the aging process. Here, a
decline in the efficiency of EMS mechanisms could lead to a
gradually widening gap between energy demand and delivery,
which in turn is expected to influence essentially all aspects of
cellular health. Extending this to disease processes, contexts for
EMS disruption that are of particular interest are disorders involving a metabolic component such as diabetes, metabolic
syndrome, Alzheimer’s disease, and vascular dementia, and
also rarer inherited metabolic diseases such as Niemann-Pick
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 21 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
disease, Tay-Sachs disease, or porphyria. Accordingly, understanding how EMS contributes to both aging and disease and
finding ways to restore or boost flagging EMS mechanisms may
help to extend the health span of aging individuals and may offer
novel approaches to treat diseases of metabolism that impact a
wide range of organ systems.
Technological developments to enable breakthroughs in
understanding EMS
To enable deeper insight into the organization and operation of
EMS mechanisms described above, key technological developments
are needed that will expand sensing capabilities and augment the
resolution of imaging approaches. Together, these will allow us to
measure EMS in increasingly complex and holistic scenarios.
Development of approaches to directly visualize EMS in tissue
volumes. At present, multiphoton imaging methods are best
suited to imaging hemodynamics and EMS processes occurring
deep within tissues. However, several technical hurdles make
visualization of EMS processes challenging. In particular, standard multiphoton systems are typically restricted to time-lapse
imaging of single planes at video rate using resonant and galvanometer scanning mirrors to guide rapid laser rastering or
acquisition of small volumes at a few hertz using piezoelectric
objective drives. To be able to fully understand EMS, advances
enabling video rate imaging of electrical signaling in large tissue
volumes are required, thus capturing the dynamics occurring
in highly convoluted vascular networks. A number of recent
technical achievements in multiphoton imaging make it feasible
to overcome these issues in the near future. In particular, the
development of FACED microscopy and its extension to blood
flow imaging enables kilohertz imaging of single planes and
megahertz imaging of single lines. These approaches are fast
enough to capture the dynamics of even the fastest moving RBCs
moving through the largest arteries and enable for the first time
the precise measurement of blood flow (i.e., RBC flux and velocity) without the need to completely collapse the spatial dimension to a single line. The application of Bessel-focused beams
has enabled the rapid imaging of considerably larger volumes
than were previously accessible (Fan et al., 2020a), and the
development of SCAPE imaging has also enabled high-speed
dynamic volumetric imaging in vivo (Bouchard et al., 2015;
Voleti et al., 2019). The widespread adoption of these exciting
techniques will enable a more detailed understanding of the
vascular dynamics of various organ systems, and the volume of
data these approaches generate will necessarily spur the development of further automated techniques for analysis.
Accompanying these hardware developments is the need to
develop novel models to enable direct visualization of the EMS
process. Thus, the generation of mouse lines that express stateof-the-art voltage sensors such as ASAP (Evans et al., 2023) or
opto-patch (Fan et al., 2020b) variants in pericytes, ECs, and
SMCs to enable direct visualization of electrical signaling occurring throughout the vasculature of an organism are essential.
These approaches can be combined with other mouse lines and
viral transfection approaches to enable the visualization of local
activity, metabolic processes, and measurements in the vasculature (Zhao et al., 2020b) throughout tissues of interest.
Approaches to visualize the activity of energy substrate availability and metabolic pathway activity in real time. Until recently,
few options have existed to visualize metabolic processes directly, and available techniques required combined measurements from many cells to obtain low temporal resolution
readouts. However, in recent years advances in probe development now promise great insights into metabolic imaging in vivo,
in real time, and with single-cell resolution. Indeed, a range of
recently developed substrate, metabolite, and energy status
sensors are poised to enable visualization of cell metabolism in
unprecedented detail. For example, the recently developed glucose sensor, green glifon (Mita et al., 2019), has an excellent
spatiotemporal resolution, allowing the real-time measurement
of glucose uptake in single cells. Combination of this with viral
vectors that allow for specific expression in cells of interest will
enable real-time monitoring of glucose availability and uptake
during various scenarios (e.g., brain region activation or increased heart contraction). Alongside this glucose sensor, fluorescent protein-based probes for lactate and pyruvate have also
been developed (Harada et al., 2020), and thus their deployment
in various cell types should allow the visualization of glycolytic
flux and the flow of lactate produced during metabolism. The
development of phosphorescent probes with lifetimes that are
sensitive to the local concentration of O2 is also now enabling the
visualization of vessel and tissue oxygenation. These studies are
updating traditional models of O2 diffusion into the tissue such
as the Krogh cylinder by providing novel insights into the dynamics of O2 consumption in working tissue. Improvements in
the spatiotemporal resolution of these imaging techniques and
their deployment in in vivo studies throughout the body will add
layers of detail to our understanding of O2 delivery and utilization (Sakadzic et al., 2010 ´ ; Parpaleix et al., 2013; Lyons et al.,
2016; Aydin et al., 2022).
Operating at the opposite end of the spectrum of substrate
consumption is PercevalHR, a probe for intracellular energy
status. This allows real-time measurement of ATP:ADP ratio and
has been deployed in neurons during activation with glucose,
KCl, or electrical stimulation and provides excellent resolution
revealing how these stimuli alter the ratio of high energy molecules within the cell (Tantama et al., 2013). Notably, several of
these probes are two-photon compatible and so should be deployable in vivo to allow the observation of how these different
aspects of metabolism intersect with one another in a systems
context. Ongoing developments in the field of redox biology,
such as the development of the novel redox probe FROG/B
(Sugiura et al., 2020), also promise to overcome the limitations
of current probes which makes their direct application and interpretation in vivo challenging. Further work to produce
imaging tools with superior signal-to-noise ratio and tailored
subcellular localization in organelles will undoubtedly yield
deeper insights into this exciting area for further development.
Visualization of the nanoscale organization of EMS complexes. A
further priority is determining the specific molecular organization of the signaling components that enable EMS in different
cell types and systems. Considering KATP channels as the central
node of currently known EMS pathways, further work is needed
to establish the specific membrane localization of these channels
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 22 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
in different cells and to elucidate the specific macromolecular
signaling complexes that they occupy. In brain pericytes, for
example, important questions to answer in the near future are
whether the KATP channels are primarily found in the cell body
or in thin-strand processes, or whether they are evenly distributed throughout the plasma membrane. Insights into the
molecular partners with which these channels most closely associate, be that the enzymes of the glycolytic machinery (DharChowdhury et al., 2005), PKA, and A-kinase anchoring proteins
(Hayabuchi et al., 2001), or as yet undetermined signaling
partners, will help in the determination of the precise intracellular mechanisms through which these channels are engaged.
An appealing possibility in this context is that the KATP channel
could occupy a macromolecular signaling complex positioned in
or very close to peg-socket junctions between pericytes and
endothelial cells (Ornelas et al., 2021), permitting the immediate transfer of charge generated by KATP channels into the
underlying endothelium for optimal electrical signaling upstream to arterioles. Further technical developments are
needed to probe EMS at this level of detail, but answering
nanoscale questions will offer insight that likely will be essential for understanding how EMS falters in aging and disease and will be needed for finding potential solutions to
rectifying such issues.
Summary and conclusions
In summary, we outline a hypothesis for EMS as a generalized
blood flow control mechanism operating across tissues with a
wide range of spatiotemporal energy needs. Specifically, EMS
can be initiated by a range of metabolic changes, including those
of substrate availability, altered intracellular energy status, and
byproducts of metabolism. Through the activity of K+ channels
and KATP channels in particular, metabolic cues are converted
into electrical signals in the vasculature which are then conducted along the capillary and arteriolar endothelium to produce
relaxation of upstream SMCs and contractile pericytes and increase blood flow to areas of metabolic need. It is possible that
disruption of EMS in aging and in disease states with metabolic
and vascular components is a key event that leads to a mismatch
between energy supply and demand and participates actively
in the development of cellular dysfunction and nominally irreversible tissue damage. Accordingly, targeting EMS for the
development of novel therapeutics may provide the means to
protect blood flow and energy delivery to tissues, thereby
counteracting the metabolic deficits that arise during aging
(Amorim et al., 2022), and helping to restore energy balance
in diseases ranging from Alzheimer’s and dementia to diabetes, metabolic syndrome, heart failure, and chronic kidney
disease.
As such, research aimed at fully elucidating the physiological
mechanisms of EMS and visualizing its contributions to blood
flow control in complex three-dimensional time-resolved networks is essential. Equally important are investigations of mechanisms by which the EMS may be damaged during aging and
disease. Likewise, therapeutic repair or restoration of damaged
EMS components to ameliorate or fix this damage may provide
partial or complete repair in diverse degenerative diseases.
Acknowledgments
David A. Eisner served as editor.
Support for this work was provided to T.A. Longden by the
National Institutes of Health National Institutes on Aging
(1R01AG066645) and Neurological Disorders and Stroke,
(5R01NS115401, and 1DP2NS121347) and by the American Heart
Association (19IPLOI34660108) and to. W.J. Lederer by the National Institutes of Heart, Lung and Blood (R01 HL142290), Allergy and Infectious Diseases (U19 AI090959), General Medical
Sciences (GM140822), and by special funds from BioMET at the
University of Maryland School of Medicine.
Author contributions: All authors reviewed the manuscript
and approved its submission.
Disclosures: The authors declare no competing interests exist.
Submitted: 26 July 2023
Revised: 27 October 2023
Accepted: 14 December 2023
References
Abd El-Rahman, R.R., O.F. Harraz, S.E. Brett, Y. Anfinogenova, R.E. Mufti, D.
Goldman, and D.G. Welsh. 2013. Identification of L- and T-type Ca2+
channels in rat cerebral arteries: Role in myogenic tone development.
Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol. 304:H58–H71. https://doi.org/10.1152/
ajpheart.00476.2012
Aguilar-Bryan, L., and J. Bryan. 1999. Molecular biology of adenosine
triphosphate-sensitive potassium channels. Endocr. Rev. 20:101–135.
https://doi.org/10.1210/edrv.20.2.0361
Ahn, S.J., I.S. Fancher, J.T. Bian, C.X. Zhang, S. Schwab, R. Gaffin, S.A. Phillips, and I. Levitan. 2017. Inwardly rectifying K+ channels are major
contributors to flow-induced vasodilatation in resistance arteries.
J. Physiol. 595:2339–2364. https://doi.org/10.1113/JP273255
Ahn, S.J., E. Le Master, J.C. Lee, S.A. Phillips, I. Levitan, and I.S. Fancher.
2022. Differential effects of obesity on visceral versus subcutaneous
adipose arteries: Role of shear-activated Kir2.1 and alterations to the
glycocalyx. Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol. 322:H156–H166. https://doi
.org/10.1152/ajpheart.00399.2021
Airan, R.D., K.R. Thompson, L.E. Fenno, H. Bernstein, and K. Deisseroth.
2009. Temporally precise in vivo control of intracellular signalling.
Nature. 458:1025–1029. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature07926
Alarcon-Martinez, L., S. Yilmaz-Ozcan, M. Yemisci, J. Schallek, K. Kılıç, A.
Can, A. Di Polo, and T. Dalkara. 2018. Capillary pericytes express
α-smooth muscle actin, which requires prevention of filamentous-actin
depolymerization for detection. Elife. 7:e34861. https://doi.org/10.7554/
eLife.34861
Allen, P.S., G.O. Matheson, G. Zhu, D. Gheorgiu, R.S. Dunlop, T. Falconer, C.
Stanley, and P.W. Hochachka. 1997. Simultaneous 31P MRS of the soleus
and gastrocnemius in Sherpas during graded calf muscle exercise. Am.
J. Physiol. 273:R999–R1007. https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpregu.1997.273.3.R999
Almaça, J., J. Weitz, R. Rodriguez-Diaz, E. Pereira, and A. Caicedo. 2018. The
pericyte of the pancreatic islet regulates capillary diameter and local
blood flow. Cell Metab. 27:630–644.e4. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cmet
.2018.02.016
Alsahli, M., and J.E. Gerich. 2017. Renal glucose metabolism in normal
physiological conditions and in diabetes. Diabetes Res. Clin. Pract. 133:
1–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.diabres.2017.07.033
Amorim, J.A., G. Coppotelli, A.P. Rolo, C.M. Palmeira, J.M. Ross, and D.A.
Sinclair. 2022. Mitochondrial and metabolic dysfunction in ageing and
age-related diseases. Nat. Rev. Endocrinol. 18:243–258. https://doi.org/10
.1038/s41574-021-00626-7
Anderson, B.G., and W.D. Anderson. 1980. Microvasculature of the canine
heart demonstrated by scanning electron microscopy. Am. J. Anat. 158:
217–227. https://doi.org/10.1002/aja.1001580210
Arnold, P.K., and L.W.S. Finley. 2023. Regulation and function of the mammalian tricarboxylic acid cycle. J. Biol. Chem. 299:102838. https://doi
.org/10.1016/j.jbc.2022.102838
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 23 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
Ashrafian, H., M.P. Frenneaux, and L.H. Opie. 2007. Metabolic mechanisms
in heart failure. Circulation. 116:434–448. https://doi.org/10.1161/
CIRCULATIONAHA.107.702795
Aydin, A.-K., C. Verdier, E. Chaigneau, and S. Charpak. 2022. The oxygen
initial dip in the brain of anesthetized and awake mice. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. USA. 119:e2200205119. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2200205119
Aziz, Q., Y. Li, N. Anderson, L. Ojake, E. Tsisanova, and A. Tinker. 2017.
Molecular and functional characterization of the endothelial ATPsensitive potassium channel. J. Biol. Chem. 292:17587–17597. https://doi
.org/10.1074/jbc.M117.810325
Babenko, A.P., and J. Bryan. 2003. Sur domains that associate with and gate
KATP pores define a novel gatekeeper. J. Biol. Chem. 278:41577–41580.
https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.C300363200
Bagher, P., T. Beleznai, Y. Kansui, R. Mitchell, C.J. Garland, and K.A. Dora.
2012. Low intravascular pressure activates endothelial cell TRPV4
channels, local Ca2+ events, and IKCa channels, reducing arteriolar tone.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 109:18174–18179. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas
.1211946109
Baker, J.S., M.C. McCormick, and R.A. Robergs. 2010. Interaction among
skeletal muscle metabolic energy systems during intense exercise.
J. Nutr. Metab. 2010:905612. https://doi.org/10.1155/2010/905612
Balaban, R.S., H.L. Kantor, L.A. Katz, and R.W. Briggs. 1986. Relation between
work and phosphate metabolite in the in vivo paced mammalian heart.
Science. 232:1121–1123. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.3704638
Ballanyi, K. 2004. Protective role of neuronal KATP channels in brain hypoxia. J. Exp. Biol. 207:3201–3212. https://doi.org/10.1242/jeb.01106
Ballanyi, K., J. Doutheil, and J. Brockhaus. 1996. Membrane potentials and
microenvironment of rat dorsal vagal cells in vitro during energy depletion. J. Physiol. 495:769–784. https://doi.org/10.1113/jphysiol.1996
.sp021632
Baukrowitz, T., U. Schulte, D. Oliver, S. Herlitze, T. Krauter, S.J. Tucker, J.P.
Ruppersberg, and B. Fakler. 1998. PIP2 and PIP as determinants for ATP
inhibition of KATP channels. Science. 282:1141–1144. https://doi.org/10
.1126/science.282.5391.1141
Beach, J.M., E.D. McGahren, and B.R. Duling. 1998. Capillaries and arterioles
are electrically coupled in hamster cheek pouch. Am. J. Physiol. 275:
H1489–H1496. https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpheart.1998.275.4.H1489
Beech, D.J., H. Zhang, K. Nakao, and T.B. Bolton. 1993. K channel activation by
nucleotide diphosphates and its inhibition by glibenclamide in vascular
smooth muscle cells. Br. J. Pharmacol. 110:573–582. https://doi.org/10
.1111/j.1476-5381.1993.tb13849.x
Berthiaume, A.A., R.I. Grant, K.P. McDowell, R.G. Underly, D.A. Hartmann,
M. Levy, N.R. Bhat, and A.Y. Shih. 2018. Dynamic remodeling of pericytes in vivo maintains capillary coverage in the adult mouse brain. Cell
Rep. 22:8–16. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2017.12.016
Bhargava, P., and R.G. Schnellmann. 2017. Mitochondrial energetics in the
kidney. Nat. Rev. Nephrol. 13:629–646. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrneph
.2017.107
Blinder, P., P.S. Tsai, J.P. Kaufhold, P.M. Knutsen, H. Suhl, and D. Kleinfeld.
2013. The cortical angiome: An interconnected vascular network with
noncolumnar patterns of blood flow. Nat. Neurosci. 16:889–897. https://
doi.org/10.1038/nn.3426
Bonev, A.D., and M.T. Nelson. 1996. Vasoconstrictors inhibit ATP-sensitive K+
channels in arterial smooth muscle through protein kinase C. J. Gen.
Physiol. 108:315–323. https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.108.4.315
Bonora, M., S. Patergnani, A. Rimessi, E. De Marchi, J.M. Suski, A. Bononi, C.
Giorgi, S. Marchi, S. Missiroli, F. Poletti, et al. 2012. ATP synthesis and
storage. Purinergic Signal. 8:343–357. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11302-012
-9305-8
Borbouse, L., G.M. Dick, S. Asano, S.B. Bender, U.D. Dincer, G.A. Payne, Z.P.
Neeb, I.N. Bratz, M. Sturek, and J.D. Tune. 2009. Impaired function of
coronary BK(Ca) channels in metabolic syndrome. Am. J. Physiol. Heart
Circ. Physiol. 297:H1629–H1637. https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpheart.00466
.2009
Bouchard, M.B., V. Voleti, C.S. Mendes, C. Lacefield, W.B. Grueber, R.S.
Mann, R.M. Bruno, and E.M.C. Hillman. 2015. Swept confocally-aligned
planar excitation (SCAPE) microscopy for high speed volumetric
imaging of behaving organisms. Nat. Photonics. 9:113–119. https://doi
.org/10.1038/nphoton.2014.323
Brayden, J.E., and M.T. Nelson. 1992. Regulation of arterial tone by activation
of calcium-dependent potassium channels. Science. 256:532–535. https://
doi.org/10.1126/science.1373909
Buttgereit, F., and M.D. Brand. 1995. A hierarchy of ATP-consuming processes in mammalian cells. Biochem. J. 312:163–167. https://doi.org/10
.1042/bj3120163
Buxton, R.B. 2001. The elusive initial dip. Neuroimage. 13:953–958. https://doi
.org/10.1006/nimg.2001.0814
Bychkov, R., K. Pieper, C. Ried, M. Milosheva, E. Bychkov, F.C. Luft, and H.
Haller. 1999. Hydrogen peroxide, potassium currents, and membrane
potential in human endothelial cells. Circulation. 99:1719–1725. https://
doi.org/10.1161/01.CIR.99.13.1719
Chabriat, H., A. Joutel, M. Dichgans, E. Tournier-Lasserve, and M.-G. Bousser.
2009. Cadasil. Lancet Neurol. 8:643–653. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1474
-4422(09)70127-9
Chai, Y., and Y.-F. Lin. 2010. Stimulation of neuronal KATP channels by
cGMP-dependent protein kinase: Involvement of ROS and 5-hydroxydecanoate-sensitive factors in signal transduction. Am. J. Physiol. Cell
Physiol. 298:C875–C892. https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpcell.00196.2009
Chai, Y., D.-M. Zhang, and Y.-F. Lin. 2011. Activation of cGMP-dependent
protein kinase stimulates cardiac ATP-sensitive potassium channels
via a ROS/calmodulin/CaMKII signaling cascade. PLoS One. 6:e18191.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0018191
Chapman, C.L., Z.J. Schlader, E.L. Reed, M.L. Worley, and B.D. Johnson. 2020.
Renal and segmental artery hemodynamic response to acute, mild hypercapnia. Am. J. Physiol. Regul. Integr. Comp. Physiol. 318:R822–R827.
https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpregu.00035.2020
Charter, M.E., I.R. Lamb, and C.L. Murrant. 2018. Arteriolar and capillary
responses to CO2 and H+ in hamster skeletal muscle microvasculature:
Implications for active hyperemia. Microcirculation. 25:e12494. https://
doi.org/10.1111/micc.12494
Checa, J., and J.M. Aran. 2020. Reactive oxygen species: Drivers of physiological and pathological processes. J. Inflamm. Res. 13:1057–1073. https://
doi.org/10.2147/JIR.S275595
Cheng, Y. 2015. Single-particle cryo-EM at crystallographic resolution. Cell.
161:450–457. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2015.03.049
Cheng, Y., N. Grigorieff, P.A. Penczek, and T. Walz. 2015. A primer to singleparticle cryo-electron microscopy. Cell. 161:438–449. https://doi.org/10
.1016/j.cell.2015.03.050
Choi, I.Y., and R. Gruetter. 2003. In vivo 13C NMR assessment of brain glycogen concentration and turnover in the awake rat. Neurochem. Int. 43:
317–322. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0197-0186(03)00018-4
Chuquet, J., P. Quilichini, E.A. Nimchinsky, and G. Buzsaki. 2010. Predomi- ´
nant enhancement of glucose uptake in astrocytes versus neurons
during activation of the somatosensory cortex. J. Neurosci. 30:
15298–15303. https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0762-10.2010
Chutkow, W.A., J.C. Makielski, D.J. Nelson, C.F. Burant, and Z. Fan. 1999.
Alternative splicing of sur2 Exon 17 regulates nucleotide sensitivity of
the ATP-sensitive potassium channel. J. Biol. Chem. 274:13656–13665.
https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.274.19.13656
Cleary, C.M., T.S. Moreira, A.C. Takakura, M.T. Nelson, T.A. Longden, and
D.K. Mulkey. 2020. Vascular control of the CO2/H+-dependent drive to
breathe. Elife. 9:e59499. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.59499
Clement, J.P. IV, K. Kunjilwar, G. Gonzalez, M. Schwanstecher, U. Panten, L.
Aguilar-Bryan, and J. Bryan. 1997. Association and stoichiometry of
K(ATP) channel subunits. Neuron. 18:827–838. https://doi.org/10.1016/
S0896-6273(00)80321-9
Conti, L.R., C.M. Radeke, and C.A. Vandenberg. 2002. Membrane targeting of
ATP-sensitive potassium channel. Effects of glycosylation on surface
expression. J. Biol. Chem. 277:25416–25422. https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc
.M203109200
Cook, D.L., and C.N. Hales. 1984. Intracellular ATP directly blocks K+ channels
in pancreatic B-cells. Nature. 311:271–273. https://doi.org/10.1038/
311271a0
Crouch, E.E., A. Bhaduri, M.G. Andrews, A. Cebrian-Silla, L.N. Diafos, J.O.
Birrueta, K. Wedderburn-Pugh, E.J. Valenzuela, N.K. Bennett, U.C. Eze,
et al. 2022. Ensembles of endothelial and mural cells promote angiogenesis in prenatal human brain. Cell. 185:3753–3769.e18. https://doi
.org/10.1016/j.cell.2022.09.004
Dabertrand, F., M.T. Nelson, and J.E. Brayden. 2012. Acidosis dilates brain
parenchymal arterioles by conversion of calcium waves to sparks to
activate BK channels. Circ. Res. 110:285–294. https://doi.org/10.1161/
CIRCRESAHA.111.258145
Dabertrand, F., R.M. Hannah, J.M. Pearson, D.C. Hill-Eubanks, J.E. Brayden,
and M.T. Nelson. 2013. Prostaglandin E2, a postulated astrocyte-derived
neurovascular coupling agent, constricts rather than dilates parenchymal arterioles. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 33:479–482. https://doi
.org/10.1038/jcbfm.2013.9
Dantzler, H.A., M.P. Matott, D. Martinez, and D.D. Kline. 2019. Hydrogen
peroxide inhibits neurons in the paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus via potassium channel activation. Am. J. Physiol. Regul. Integr.
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 24 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
Comp. Physiol. 317:R121–R133. https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpregu.00054
.2019
Daut, J., N.B. Standen, and M.T. Nelson. 1994. The role of the membrane
potential of endothelial and smooth muscle cells in the regulation of
coronary blood flow. J. Cardiovasc. Electrophysiol. 5:154–181. https://doi
.org/10.1111/j.1540-8167.1994.tb01156.x
Davies, L.M., G.I. Purves, R. Barrett-Jolley, and C. Dart. 2010. Interaction with
caveolin-1 modulates vascular ATP-sensitive potassium (KATP) channel
activity. J. Physiol. 588:3255–3266. https://doi.org/10.1113/jphysiol.2010
.194779
de la Torre, J.C. 2000a. Cerebral hypoperfusion, capillary degeneration, and
development of Alzheimer disease. Alzheimer Dis. Assoc. Disord. 14:
S72–S81. https://doi.org/10.1097/00002093-200000001-00012
de la Torre, J.C. 2000b. Critically attained threshold of cerebral hypoperfusion: Can it cause Alzheimer’s disease? Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 903:
424–436. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1749-6632.2000.tb06394.x
de Matthaeis, A., A. Greco, M.P. Dagostino, G. Paroni, A. Fontana, M. Vinciguerra, G. Mazzoccoli, D. Seripa, and G. Vendemiale. 2014. Effects of
hypercapnia on peripheral vascular reactivity in elderly patients with
acute exacerbation of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Clin. Interv. Aging. 9:871–878. https://doi.org/10.2147/CIA.S57548
Deng, D., C. Xu, P. Sun, J. Wu, C. Yan, M. Hu, and N. Yan. 2014. Crystal
structure of the human glucose transporter GLUT1. Nature. 510:121–125.
https://doi.org/10.1038/nature13306
Dhar-Chowdhury, P., M.D. Harrell, S.Y. Han, D. Jankowska, L. Parachuru, A.
Morrissey, S. Srivastava, W. Liu, B. Malester, H. Yoshida, and W.A.
Coetzee. 2005. The glycolytic enzymes, glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate
dehydrogenase, triose-phosphate isomerase, and pyruvate kinase are
components of the K(ATP) channel macromolecular complex and regulate its function. J. Biol. Chem. 280:38464–38470. https://doi.org/10
.1074/jbc.M508744200
Dienel, G.A. 2012. Brain lactate metabolism: The discoveries and the controversies. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 32:1107–1138. https://doi.org/10
.1038/jcbfm.2011.175
DiNuzzo, M. 2019. How glycogen sustains brain function: A plausible allosteric signaling pathway mediated by glucose phosphates. J. Cereb. Blood
Flow Metab. 39:1452–1459. https://doi.org/10.1177/0271678X19856713
Dora, K.A., M.P. Doyle, and B.R. Duling. 1997. Elevation of intracellular calcium in smooth muscle causes endothelial cell generation of NO in
arterioles. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 94:6529–6534. https://doi.org/10
.1073/pnas.94.12.6529
Dora, K.A., J. Xia, and B.R. Duling. 2003. Endothelial cell signaling during
conducted vasomotor responses. Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol. 285:
H119–H126. https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpheart.00643.2002
Dubinsky, W.P., O. Mayorga-Wark, and S.G. Schultz. 1998. Colocalization of
glycolytic enzyme activity and KATP channels in basolateral membrane
of Necturus enterocytes. Am. J. Physiol. 275:C1653–C1659. https://doi
.org/10.1152/ajpcell.1998.275.6.C1653
Duncker, D.J., and R.J. Bache. 2008. Regulation of coronary blood flow during
exercise. Physiol. Rev. 88:1009–1086. https://doi.org/10.1152/physrev
.00045.2006
Dunn, A.K., A. Devor, A.M. Dale, and D.A. Boas. 2005. Spatial extent of
oxygen metabolism and hemodynamic changes during functional activation of the rat somatosensory cortex. Neuroimage. 27:279–290.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2005.04.024
Earley, S., and J.E. Brayden. 2015. Transient receptor potential channels in
the vasculature. Physiol. Rev. 95:645–690. https://doi.org/10.1152/
physrev.00026.2014
Eckel, R.H., K.G. Alberti, S.M. Grundy, and P.Z. Zimmet. 2010. The metabolic
syndrome. Lancet. 375:181–183. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(09)
61794-3
Edwards, G., K.A. Dora, M.J. Gardener, C.J. Garland, and A.H. Weston. 1998.
K+ is an endothelium-derived hyperpolarizing factor in rat arteries.
Nature. 396:269–272. https://doi.org/10.1038/24388
Emerson, G.G., and S.S. Segal. 2000. Endothelial cell pathway for conduction
of hyperpolarization and vasodilation along hamster feed artery. Circ.
Res. 86:94–100. https://doi.org/10.1161/01.RES.86.1.94
Emerson, G.G., and S.S. Segal. 2001. Electrical activation of endothelium
evokes vasodilation and hyperpolarization along hamster feed arteries.
Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol. 280:H160–H167. https://doi.org/10
.1152/ajpheart.2001.280.1.H160
Evans, S.W., D.-Q. Shi, M. Chavarha, M.H. Plitt, J. Taxidis, B. Madruga, J.L. Fan,
F.-J. Hwang, S.C. van Keulen, C.-M. Suomivuori, et al. 2023. A positively
tuned voltage indicator for extended electrical recordings in the brain.Nat.
Methods. 20:1104–1113. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-023-01913-z
Fan, L.-H., H.-Y. Tian, A.-Q. Ma, Z. Hu, J.-H. Huo, and Y.-X. Cao. 2008. Altered ATP-sensitive potassium channels may underscore obesitytriggered increase in blood pressure. Acta Pharmacol. Sin. 29:1167–1174.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1745-7254.2008.00810.x
Fan, L.-H., H.-Y. Tian, M.-L. Yang, A.-Q. Ma, Z. Hu, X.-J. Bai, and Y.-X. Cao.
2009. High-fat diet may impair K(ATP) channels in vascular smooth
muscle cells. Biomed. Pharmacother. 63:165–170. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.biopha.2008.01.005
Fan, J.L., J.A. Rivera, W. Sun, J. Peterson, H. Haeberle, S. Rubin, and N. Ji.
2020a. High-speed volumetric two-photon fluorescence imaging of
neurovascular dynamics. Nat. Commun. 11:6020. https://doi.org/10
.1038/s41467-020-19851-1
Fan, L.Z., S. Kheifets, U.L. Bohm, H. Wu, K.D. Piatkevich, M.E. Xie, V. Parot, ¨
Y. Ha, K.E. Evans, E.S. Boyden, et al. 2020b. All-Optical electrophysiology reveals the role of lateral inhibition in sensory processing in
cortical layer 1. Cell. 180:521–535.e18. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2020
.01.001
Fancher, I.S., E. Le Master, S.J. Ahn, C. Adamos, J.C. Lee, E. Berdyshev, R.O.
Dull, S.A. Phillips, and I. Levitan. 2020. Impairment of flow-sensitive
inwardly rectifying K+ channels via disruption of glycocalyx mediates
obesity-induced endothelial dysfunction. Arterioscler. Thromb. Vasc. Biol.
40:e240–e255. https://doi.org/10.1161/ATVBAHA.120.314935
Fernandes, C.A.H., D. Zuniga, C. Fagnen, V. Kugler, R. Scala, G. Pehau-Ar- ´
naudet, R. Wagner, D. Perahia, S. Bendahhou, and C. Venien-Bryan. ´
2022. Cryo-electron microscopy unveils unique structural features of
the human Kir2.1 channel. Sci. Adv. 8:eabq8489. https://doi.org/10.1126/
sciadv.abq8489
Fernandez-Klett, F., N. Offenhauser, U. Dirnagl, J. Priller, and U. Lindauer. ´
2010. Pericytes in capillaries are contractile in vivo, but arterioles
mediate functional hyperemia in the mouse brain. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA. 107:22290–22295. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1011321108
Figueroa, X.F., and B.R. Duling. 2009. Gap junctions in the control of vascular
function. Antioxid. Redox Signal. 11:251–266. https://doi.org/10.1089/ars
.2008.2117
Forman, H.J., M. Maiorino, and F. Ursini. 2010. Signaling functions of reactive oxygen species. Biochemistry. 49:835–842. https://doi.org/10.1021/
bi9020378
Forstermann, U. 2010. Nitric oxide and oxidative stress in vascular disease. ¨
Pflugers Arch. 459:923–939. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00424-010-0808-2
Foster, M.N., and W.A. Coetzee. 2016. KATP channels in the cardiovascular
system. Physiol. Rev. 96:177–252. https://doi.org/10.1152/physrev.00003
.2015
Fujita, A., and Y. Kurachi. 2000. Molecular aspects of ATP-sensitive K+
channels in the cardiovascular system and K+ channel openers. Pharmacol. Ther. 85:39–53. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0163-7258(99)00050-9
Garland, C.J., P. Bagher, C. Powell, X. Ye, H.A.L. Lemmey, L. Borysova, and
K.A. Dora. 2017. Voltage-dependent Ca2+ entry into smooth muscle
during contraction promotes endothelium-mediated feedback vasodilation in arterioles. Sci. Signal. 10:eaal3806. https://doi.org/10.1126/
scisignal.aal3806
Garthwaite, J. 2019. NO as a multimodal transmitter in the brain: Discovery
and current status. Br. J. Pharmacol. 176:197–211. https://doi.org/10.1111/
bph.14532
Giannitsi, S., M. Bougiakli, A. Bechlioulis, and K. Naka. 2019. Endothelial
dysfunction and heart failure: A review of the existing bibliography
with emphasis on flow mediated dilation. JRSM Cardiovasc. Dis. 8:
2048004019843047. https://doi.org/10.1177/2048004019843047
Gold, P.E., and D.L. Korol. 2012. Making memories matter. Front. Integr.
Neurosci. 6:116. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnint.2012.00116
Goldberg, I.J., C.M. Trent, and P.C. Schulze. 2012. Lipid metabolism and
toxicity in the heart. Cell Metab. 15:805–812. https://doi.org/10.1016/j
.cmet.2012.04.006
Gonçalves, L.M., M.M. Fahd Qadir, M. Boulina, M. Makhmutova, E. Pereira,
and J. Almaça. 2023. Pericyte dysfunction and impaired vasomotion are
hallmarks of islets during the pathogenesis of type 1 diabetes. Cell Reports. 42:112913. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2023.112913
Gonzales, A.L., Y. Yang, M.N. Sullivan, L. Sanders, F. Dabertrand, D.C. HillEubanks, M.T. Nelson, and S. Earley. 2014. A PLCγ1-dependent, forcesensitive signaling network in the myogenic constriction of cerebral
arteries. Sci. Signal. 7:ra49. https://doi.org/10.1126/scisignal.2004732
Gonzales, A.L., N.R. Klug, A. Moshkforoush, J.C. Lee, F.K. Lee, B. Shui, N.M.
Tsoukias, M.I. Kotlikoff, D. Hill-Eubanks, and M.T. Nelson. 2020.
Contractile pericytes determine the direction of blood flow at capillary
junctions. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 117:27022–27033. https://doi.org/10
.1073/pnas.1922755117
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 25 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
Gordon, G.R.J., H.B. Choi, R.L. Rungta, G.C.R. Ellis-Davies, and B.A. MacVicar.
2008. Brain metabolism dictates the polarity of astrocyte control over
arterioles. Nature. 456:745–749. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature07525
Gould, I.G., P. Tsai, D. Kleinfeld, and A. Linninger. 2017. The capillary bed
offers the largest hemodynamic resistance to the cortical blood
supply. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 37:52–68. https://doi.org/10.1177/
0271678X16671146
Grant, R.I., D.A. Hartmann, R.G. Underly, A.-A. Berthiaume, N.R. Bhat, and
A.Y. Shih. 2019. Organizational hierarchy and structural diversity of
microvascular pericytes in adult mouse cortex. J. Cereb. Blood Flow
Metab. 39:411–425. https://doi.org/10.1177/0271678X17732229
Greiner, J.V., and T. Glonek. 2021. Intracellular ATP concentration and implication for cellular evolution. Biology. 10:1166. https://doi.org/10
.3390/biology10111166
Gribble, F.M., G. Loussouarn, S.J. Tucker, C. Zhao, C.G. Nichols, and F.M.
Ashcroft. 2000. A novel method for measurement of submembrane
ATP concentration. J. Biol. Chem. 275:30046–30049. https://doi.org/10
.1074/jbc.M001010200
Grubb, S., C. Cai, B.O. Hald, L. Khennouf, R.P. Murmu, A.G.K. Jensen, J.
Fordsmann, S. Zambach, and M. Lauritzen. 2020. Precapillary sphincters maintain perfusion in the cerebral cortex. Nat. Commun. 11:395.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-020-14330-z
Haas, T.L., and B.R. Duling. 1997. Morphology favors an endothelial cell
pathway for longitudinal conduction within arterioles. Microvasc. Res.
53:113–120. https://doi.org/10.1006/mvre.1996.1999
Hald, B.O., and D.G. Welsh. 2020. Conceptualizing conduction as a pliant
electrical response: Impact of gap junctions and ion channels. Am.
J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol. 319:H1276–H1289. https://doi.org/10.1152/
ajpheart.00285.2020
Hall, C.N., C. Reynell, B. Gesslein, N.B. Hamilton, A. Mishra, B.A. Sutherland,
F.M. O’Farrell, A.M. Buchan, M. Lauritzen, and D. Attwell. 2014. Capillary pericytes regulate cerebral blood flow in health and disease.
Nature. 508:55–60. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature13165
Halliday, M.R., S.V. Rege, Q. Ma, Z. Zhao, C.A. Miller, E.A. Winkler, and B.V.
Zlokovic. 2016. Accelerated pericyte degeneration and blood-brain
barrier breakdown in apolipoprotein E4 carriers with Alzheimer’s
disease. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 36:216–227. https://doi.org/10.1038/
jcbfm.2015.44
Han, J., I. So, E.Y. Kim, and Y.E. Earm. 1993. ATP-sensitive potassium
channels are modulated by intracellular lactate in rabbit ventricular
myocytes. Pflugers Arch. 425:546–548. https://doi.org/10.1007/
BF00374883
Han, J., N. Kim, E. Kim, W.-K. Ho, and Y.E. Earm. 2001. Modulation of ATPsensitive potassium channels by cGMP-dependent protein kinase in
rabbit ventricular myocytes. J. Biol. Chem. 276:22140–22147. https://doi
.org/10.1074/jbc.M010103200
Hannah, R.M., K.M. Dunn, A.D. Bonev, and M.T. Nelson. 2011. Endothelial
SK(Ca) and IK(Ca) channels regulate brain parenchymal arteriolar diameter and cortical cerebral blood flow. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 31:
1175–1186. https://doi.org/10.1038/jcbfm.2010.214
Harada, K., T. Chihara, Y. Hayasaka, M. Mita, M. Takizawa, K. Ishida, M.
Arai, S. Tsuno, M. Matsumoto, T. Ishihara, et al. 2020. Green fluorescent protein-based lactate and pyruvate indicators suitable for biochemical assays and live cell imaging. Sci. Rep. 10:19562. https://doi.org/
10.1038/s41598-020-76440-4
Hariharan, A., N. Weir, C. Robertson, L. He, C. Betsholtz, and T.A. Longden.
2020. The ion channel and GPCR toolkit of brain capillary pericytes.
Front. Cell. Neurosci. 14:601324. https://doi.org/10.3389/fncel.2020
.601324
Hariharan, A., C.D. Robertson, D.C.G. Garcia, and T.A. Longden. 2022. Brain
capillary pericytes are metabolic sentinels that control blood flow
through a KATP channel-dependent energy switch. Cell Rep. 41:111872.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2022.111872
Harraz, O.F., R.R. Abd El-Rahman, K. Bigdely-Shamloo, S.M. Wilson, S.E.
Brett, M. Romero, A.L. Gonzales, S. Earley, E.J. Vigmond, A. Nygren,
et al. 2014. Ca(V)3.2 channels and the induction of negative feedback in
cerebral arteries. Circ. Res. 115:650–661. https://doi.org/10.1161/
CIRCRESAHA.114.304056
Harraz, O.F., T.A. Longden, F. Dabertrand, D. Hill-Eubanks, and M.T. Nelson.
2018a. Endothelial GqPCR activity controls capillary electrical signaling
and brain blood flow through PIP2 depletion. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA.
115:E3569–E3577. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1800201115
Harraz, O.F., T.A. Longden, D. Hill-Eubanks, and M.T. Nelson. 2018b. PIP2
depletion promotes TRPV4 channel activity in mouse brain capillary
endothelial cells. Elife. 7:e38689. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.38689
Harraz, O.F., D. Hill-Eubanks, and M.T. Nelson. 2020. PIP2: A critical regulator of vascular ion channels hiding in plain sight. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA. 117:20378–20389. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2006737117
Harraz, O.F., N.R. Klug, A.J. Senatore, D.C. Hill-Eubanks, and M.T. Nelson. 2022. Piezo1 is a mechanosensor channel in central nervous
system capillaries. Circ. Res. 130:1531–1546. https://doi.org/10.1161/
CIRCRESAHA.122.320827
Hartmann, D.A., A.-A. Berthiaume, R.I. Grant, S.A. Harrill, T. Koski, T. Tieu,
K.P. McDowell, A.V. Faino, A.L. Kelly, and A.Y. Shih. 2021. Brain capillary pericytes exert a substantial but slow influence on blood flow.
Nat. Neurosci. 24:633–645. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41593-020-00793-2
Harvey, W. 1957. Movement of the Heart and Blood in Animals. Blackwell
Scientific, Oxford, UK.
Hayabuchi, Y., C. Dart, and N.B. Standen. 2001. Evidence for involvement of
A-kinase anchoring protein in activation of rat arterial K(ATP) channels
by protein kinase A. J. Physiol. 536:421–427. https://doi.org/10.1111/j
.1469-7793.2001.0421c.xd
He, Y.Y., S.J. Yu, Y. Cui, and P. Du. 2010. Morphological study on microvasculature of left ventricular wall in infant and adult yaks. Anat. Rec.
293:1519–1526. https://doi.org/10.1002/ar.21201
He, L., M. Vanlandewijck, M.A. Mae, J. Andrae, K. Ando, F. Del Gaudio, K. ¨
Nahar, T. Lebouvier, B. Laviña, L. Gouveia, et al. 2018. Single-cell RNA
sequencing of mouse brain and lung vascular and vessel-associated cell
types. Sci. Data. 5:180160. https://doi.org/10.1038/sdata.2018.160
Hein, T.W., W. Xu, and L. Kuo. 2006. Dilation of retinal arterioles in response
to lactate: Role of nitric oxide, guanylyl cyclase, and ATP-sensitive
potassium channels. Invest. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 47:693–699. https://
doi.org/10.1167/iovs.05-1224
Heintz, A., T. Koch, and A. Deussen. 2005. Intact nitric oxide production is
obligatory for the sustained flow response during hypercapnic acidosis
in guinea pig heart. Cardiovasc. Res. 66:55–63. https://doi.org/10.1016/j
.cardiores.2004.12.001
Hellsten, Y., D. Maclean, G. Radegran, B. Saltin, and J. Bangsbo. 1998. Ade- ˚
nosine concentrations in the interstitium of resting and contracting
human skeletal muscle. Circulation. 98:6–8. https://doi.org/10.1161/01
.CIR.98.1.6
Heppner, T.J., A.D. Bonev, L.F. Santana, and M.T. Nelson. 2002. Alkaline pH
shifts Ca2+ sparks to Ca2+ waves in smooth muscle cells of pressurized
cerebral arteries. Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol. 283:H2169–H2176.
https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpheart.00603.2002
Hibino, H., A. Inanobe, K. Furutani, S. Murakami, I. Findlay, and Y. Kurachi.
2010. Inwardly rectifying potassium channels: Their structure, function, and physiological roles. Physiol. Rev. 90:291–366. https://doi.org/10
.1152/physrev.00021.2009
Hilgemann, D.W., and R. Ball. 1996. Regulation of cardiac Na+,Ca2+ exchange
and KATP potassium channels by PIP2. Science. 273:956–959. https://doi
.org/10.1126/science.273.5277.956
Hill, R.A., L. Tong, P. Yuan, S. Murikinati, S. Gupta, and J. Grutzendler. 2015.
Regional blood flow in the normal and ischemic brain is controlled by
arteriolar smooth muscle cell contractility and not by capillary pericytes. Neuron. 87:95–110. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2015.06.001
Hille, B., E.J. Dickson, M. Kruse, O. Vivas, and B.-C. Suh. 2015. Phosphoinositides regulate ion channels. Biochim. Biophys. Acta. 1851:844–856.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbalip.2014.09.010
Hirode, G., and R.J. Wong. 2020. Trends in the prevalence of metabolic
syndrome in the United States, 2011–2016. JAMA. 323:2526–2528.
https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2020.4501
Ho, T., E. Potapenko, D.B. Davis, and M.J. Merrins. 2023. A plasma
membrane-associated glycolytic metabolon is functionally coupled to
KATP channels in pancreatic α and β cells from humans and mice. Cell
Rep. 42:112394. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2023.112394
Hong, M., E. Kefaloyianni, L. Bao, B. Malester, D. Delaroche, T.A. Neubert,
and W.A. Coetzee. 2011. Cardiac ATP-sensitive K+ channel associates
with the glycolytic enzyme complex. FASEB J. 25:2456–2467. https://doi
.org/10.1096/fj.10-176669
Hori, M., and M. Kitakaze. 1991. Adenosine, the heart, and coronary circulation. Hypertension. 18:565–574. https://doi.org/10.1161/01.HYP.18.5
.565
Horie, M., H. Irisawa, and A. Noma. 1987. Voltage-dependent magnesium
block of adenosine-triphosphate-sensitive potassium channel in
guinea-pig ventricular cells. J. Physiol. 387:251–272. https://doi.org/10
.1113/jphysiol.1987.sp016572
Hosford, P.S., J.A. Wells, S. Nizari, I.N. Christie, S.M. Theparambil, P.A.
Castro, A. Hadjihambi, L.F. Barros, I. Ruminot, M.F. Lythgoe, and A.V.
Gourine. 2022. CO2 signaling mediates neurovascular coupling in the
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 26 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
cerebral cortex. Nat. Commun. 13:2125. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467
-022-29622-9
Hu, Y., and G.S. Wilson. 1997a. Rapid changes in local extracellular rat brain
glucose observed with an in vivo glucose sensor. J. Neurochem. 68:
1745–1752. https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1471-4159.1997.68041745.x
Hu, Y., and G.S. Wilson. 1997b. A temporary local energy pool coupled to
neuronal activity: Fluctuations of extracellular lactate levels in rat brain
monitored with rapid-response enzyme-based sensor. J. Neurochem. 69:
1484–1490. https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1471-4159.1997.69041484.x
Hu, X., and E. Yacoub. 2012. The story of the initial dip in fMRI. Neuroimage.
62:1103–1108. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012.03.005
Huang, Y., D. Hu, C. Huang, and C.G. Nichols. 2019. Genetic discovery of ATPsensitive K+ channels in cardiovascular diseases. Circ. Arrhythm. Electrophysiol. 12:e007322. https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCEP.119.007322
Inagaki, N., T. Gonoi, J.P. Clement IV, N. Namba, J. Inazawa, G. Gonzalez, L.
Aguilar-Bryan, S. Seino, and J. Bryan. 1995. Reconstitution of IKATP: An
inward rectifier subunit plus the sulfonylurea receptor. Science. 270:
1166–1170. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.270.5239.1166
Inagaki, N., T. Gonoi, and S. Seino. 1997. Subunit stoichiometry of the pancreatic β-cell ATP-sensitive K+ channel. FEBS Lett. 409:232–236. https://
doi.org/10.1016/S0014-5793(97)00488-2
Iturria-Medina, Y., R.C. Sotero, P.J. Toussaint, J.M. Mateos-Perez, A.C. Evans, ´
M.W. Weiner, P. Aisen, R. Petersen, C.R. Jack, W. Jagust, et al. 2016.
Early role of vascular dysregulation on late-onset Alzheimer’s disease
based on multifactorial data-driven analysis. Nat. Commun. 7:11934.
https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms11934
Jackson, W.F. 2016. Arteriolar oxygen reactivity: Where is the sensor and
what is the mechanism of action? J. Physiol. 594:5055–5077. https://doi
.org/10.1113/JP270192
Jackson, W.F. 2017. Potassium channels in regulation of vascular smooth
muscle contraction and growth. Adv. Pharmacol. 78:89–144. https://doi
.org/10.1016/bs.apha.2016.07.001
Jackson, W.F. 2022. Endothelial ion channels and cell-cell communication in
the microcirculation. Front. Physiol. 13:805149. https://doi.org/10.3389/
fphys.2022.805149
Jaggar, J.H. 2001. Intravascular pressure regulates local and global Ca(2+)
signaling in cerebral artery smooth muscle cells. Am. J. Physiol. Cell
Physiol. 281:C439–C448. https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpcell.2001.281.2.C439
Jaggar, J.H., V.A. Porter, W.J. Lederer, and M.T. Nelson. 2000. Calcium sparks
in smooth muscle. Am. J. Physiol. Cell Physiol. 278:C235–C256. https://doi
.org/10.1152/ajpcell.2000.278.2.C235
Jenkins, C.M., J. Yang, H.F. Sims, and R.W. Gross. 2011. Reversible high affinity inhibition of phosphofructokinase-1 by acyl-CoA: A mechanism
integrating glycolytic flux with lipid metabolism. J. Biol. Chem. 286:
11937–11950. https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M110.203661
Jovanovic, S., Q. Du, R.M. Crawford, G.R. Budas, I. Stagljar, and A. Jovanovi ´ c. ´
2005. Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase serves as an accessory protein of the cardiac sarcolemmal K(ATP) channel. EMBO Rep. 6:
848–852. https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.embor.7400489
Karagiannis, A., T. Gallopin, A. Lacroix, F. Plaisier, J. Piquet, H. Geoffroy, R.
Hepp, J. Naude, B. Le Gac, R. Egger, et al. 2021. Lactate is an energy ´
substrate for rodent cortical neurons and enhances their firing activity.
Elife. 10:e71424. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.71424
Kasischke, K.A., H.D. Vishwasrao, P.J. Fisher, W.R. Zipfel, and W.W. Webb.
2004. Neural activity triggers neuronal oxidative metabolism followed
by astrocytic glycolysis. Science. 305:99–103. https://doi.org/10.1126/
science.1096485
Kawano, T., V. Zoga, M. Kimura, M.-Y. Liang, H.-E. Wu, G. Gemes, J.B.
McCallum, W.-M. Kwok, Q.H. Hogan, and C.D. Sarantopoulos. 2009.
Nitric oxide activates ATP-sensitive potassium channels in mammalian
sensory neurons: Action by direct S-nitrosylation. Mol. Pain. 5:12.
https://doi.org/10.1186/1744-8069-5-12
Kim, D.-S., T.Q. Duong, and S.-G. Kim. 2000. High-resolution mapping of isoorientation columns by fMRI. Nat. Neurosci. 3:164–169. https://doi.org/
10.1038/72109
Kirst, C., S. Skriabine, A. Vieites-Prado, T. Topilko, P. Bertin, G. Gerschenfeld,
F. Verny, P. Topilko, N. Michalski, M. Tessier-Lavigne, and N. Renier.
2020. Mapping the fine-scale organization and plasticity of the brain
vasculature. Cell. 180:780–795.e25. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2020
.01.028
Klug, N.R., M. Sancho, A.L. Gonzales, T.J. Heppner, R.I.C. O’Brien, D. HillEubanks, and M.T. Nelson. 2023. Intraluminal pressure elevates intracellular calcium and contracts CNS pericytes: Role of voltage-dependent
calcium channels. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 120:e2216421120. https://doi
.org/10.1073/pnas.2216421120
Knot, H.J., and M.T. Nelson. 1995. Regulation of membrane potential and
diameter by voltage-dependent K+ channels in rabbit myogenic cerebral
arteries. Am. J. Physiol. 269:H348–H355. https://doi.org/10.1152/
ajpheart.1995.269.1.H348
Knot, H.J., and M.T. Nelson. 1998. Regulation of arterial diameter and wall
[Ca2+] in cerebral arteries of rat by membrane potential and intravascular pressure. J. Physiol. 508:199–209. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469
-7793.1998.199br.x
Kotecha, N., and M.A. Hill. 2005. Myogenic contraction in rat skeletal muscle
arterioles: Smooth muscle membrane potential and Ca(2+) signaling.
Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol. 289:H1326–H1334. https://doi.org/10
.1152/ajpheart.00323.2005
Krucker, T., A. Lang, and E.P. Meyer. 2006. New polyurethane-based material for vascular corrosion casting with improved physical and
imaging characteristics. Microsc. Res. Tech. 69:138–147. https://doi.org/
10.1002/jemt.20263
Kubo, Y., and Y. Murata. 2001. Control of rectification and permeation by two
distinct sites after the second transmembrane region in Kir2.1 K+
channel. J. Physiol. 531:645–660. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-7793.2001
.0645h.x
Kubo, M., Y. Nakaya, S. Matsuoka, K. Saito, and Y. Kuroda. 1994. Atrial natriuretic factor and isosorbide dinitrate modulate the gating of ATPsensitive K+ channels in cultured vascular smooth muscle cells. Circ. Res.
74:471–476. https://doi.org/10.1161/01.RES.74.3.471
Lamb, T.W., M.M. Cebrik, J.S. Kaiser, C.F. Belanger Jr., A.B. Munro, and A.B.
Munro. 1966. Skeletal muscle blood flow during hypercapnic hyperventilation. Respir. Physiol. 1:249–257. https://doi.org/10.1016/0034
-5687(66)90044-2
Lamb, I.R., N.M. Novielli, and C.L. Murrant. 2018. Capillary response to
skeletal muscle contraction: Evidence that redundancy between vasodilators is physiologically relevant during active hyperaemia. J. Physiol.
596:1357–1372. https://doi.org/10.1113/JP275467
Larcombe-McDouall, J., N. Buttell, N. Harrison, and S. Wray. 1999. In vivo pH
and metabolite changes during a single contraction in rat uterine
smooth muscle. J. Physiol. 518:783–790. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469
-7793.1999.0783p.x
Lederer, W.J., H. Cheng, L.F. Santana, A.M. Gomez, T.B. Rogers, M.B. Cannell,
M. Rubart, and M.T. Nelson. 1996. Molecular understanding of
excitation-contraction coupling and vascular flow control in heart
muscle. In Tissue Oxygen Deprivation: From Molecular to Integrated
Function. G.G. Haddad and G. Lister, editors. Taylor & Francis, New
York. 497–513.
Ledo, A., E. Fernandes, A. Salvador, J. Laranjinha, and R.M. Barbosa. 2022. In
vivo hydrogen peroxide diffusivity in brain tissue supports volume
signaling activity. Redox Biol. 50:102250. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.redox
.2022.102250
Ledoux, J., M.S. Taylor, A.D. Bonev, R.M. Hannah, V. Solodushko, B. Shui, Y.
Tallini, M.I. Kotlikoff, and M.T. Nelson. 2008. Functional architecture
of inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate signaling in restricted spaces of myoendothelial projections. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 105:9627–9632.
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0801963105
Lee, K.P.K., J. Chen, and R. MacKinnon. 2017. Molecular structure of human
KATP in complex with ATP and ADP. Elife. 6:e32481. https://doi.org/10
.7554/eLife.32481
Lee, M.D., C. Wilson, C.D. Saunter, C. Kennedy, J.M. Girkin, and J.G.
McCarron. 2018. Spatially structured cell populations process multiple
sensory signals in parallel in intact vascular endothelium. Sci. Signal. 11:
eaar4411. https://doi.org/10.1126/scisignal.aar4411
Lennicke, C., J. Rahn, R. Lichtenfels, L.A. Wessjohann, and B. Seliger. 2015.
Hydrogen peroxide: Production, fate and role in redox signaling of
tumor cells. Cell Commun. Signal. 13:39. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12964
-015-0118-6
Li, N., J.-X. Wu, D. Ding, J. Cheng, N. Gao, and L. Chen. 2017. Structure of a
pancreatic ATP-sensitive potassium channel. Cell. 168:101–110.e10.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2016.12.028
Li, H., C. Guglielmetti, Y.J. Sei, M. Zilberter, L.M. Le Page, L. Shields, J. Yang,
K. Nguyen, B. Tiret, X. Gao, et al. 2023. Neurons require glucose uptake
and glycolysis in vivo. Cell Rep. 42:112335. https://doi.org/10.1016/j
.celrep.2023.112335
Lindauer, U., A. Kunz, S. Schuh-Hofer, J. Vogt, J.P. Dreier, and U. Dirnagl.
2001a. Nitric oxide from perivascular nerves modulates cerebral arterial pH reactivity. Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol. 281:H1353–H1363.
https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpheart.2001.281.3.H1353
Lindauer, U., G. Royl, C. Leithner, M. Kühl, L. Gold, J. Gethmann, M. KohlBareis, A. Villringer, and U. Dirnagl. 2001b. No evidence for early
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 27 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
decrease in blood oxygenation in rat whisker cortex in response to
functional activation. Neuroimage. 13:988–1001. https://doi.org/10
.1006/nimg.2000.0709
Liss, B., and J. Roeper. 2001. Molecular physiology of neuronal K-ATP
channels (review). Mol. Membr. Biol. 18:117–127. https://doi.org/10.1080/
09687680110047373
Little, T.L., E.C. Beyer, and B.R. Duling. 1995a. Connexin 43 and connexin 40
gap junctional proteins are present in arteriolar smooth muscle and
endothelium in vivo. Am. J. Physiol. 268:H729–H739. https://doi.org/10
.1152/ajpheart.1995.268.2.H729
Little, T.L., J. Xia, and B.R. Duling. 1995b. Dye tracers define differential endothelial and smooth muscle coupling patterns within the arteriolar
wall. Circ. Res. 76:498–504. https://doi.org/10.1161/01.RES.76.3.498
Litvinukov ˇ a, M., C. Talavera-López, H. Maatz, D. Reichart, C.L. Worth, E.L. ´
Lindberg, M. Kanda, K. Polanski, M. Heinig, M. Lee, et al. 2020. Cells of
the adult human heart. Nature. 588:466–472. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41586-020-2797-4
Logothetis, N. 2000. Can current fMRI techniques reveal the microarchitecture of cortex? Nat. Neurosci. 3:413–414. https://doi.org/10
.1038/74768
Longden, T.A., and M.T. Nelson. 2015. Vascular inward rectifier K+ channels
as external K+ sensors in the control of cerebral blood flow. Microcirculation. 22:183–196. https://doi.org/10.1111/micc.12190
Longden, T.A., F. Dabertrand, D.C. Hill-Eubanks, S.E. Hammack, and M.T.
Nelson. 2014. Stress-induced glucocorticoid signaling remodels neurovascular coupling through impairment of cerebrovascular inwardly
rectifying K+ channel function. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 111:7462–7467.
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1401811111
Longden, T.A., F. Dabertrand, M. Koide, A.L. Gonzales, N.R. Tykocki, J.E.
Brayden, D. Hill-Eubanks, and M.T. Nelson. 2017. Capillary K+-sensing
initiates retrograde hyperpolarization to increase local cerebral blood
flow. Nat. Neurosci. 20:717–726. https://doi.org/10.1038/nn.4533
Longden, T.A., A. Mughal, G.W. Hennig, O.F. Harraz, B. Shui, F.K. Lee, J.C.
Lee, S. Reining, M.I. Kotlikoff, G.M. Konig, et al. 2021. Local IP ¨ 3
receptor-mediated Ca2+ signals compound to direct blood flow in brain
capillaries. Sci. Adv. 7:eabh0101. https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.abh0101
Longden, T.A., G. Zhao, A. Hariharan, and W.J. Lederer. 2023. Pericytes and
the control of blood flow in brain and heart. Annu. Rev. Physiol. 85:
137–164. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-physiol-031522-034807
López-Ot´ın, C., M.A. Blasco, L. Partridge, M. Serrano, and G. Kroemer. 2023.
Hallmarks of aging: An expanding universe. Cell. 186:243–278. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2022.11.001
Lu, Z., and R. MacKinnon. 1994. Electrostatic tuning of Mg2+ affinity in an
inward-rectifier K+ channel. Nature. 371:243–246. https://doi.org/10
.1038/371243a0
Lu, T., D. Ye, X. Wang, J.M. Seubert, J.P. Graves, J.A. Bradbury, D.C. Zeldin,
and H.-C. Lee. 2006. Cardiac and vascular KATP channels in rats are
activated by endogenous epoxyeicosatrienoic acids through different
mechanisms. J. Physiol. 575:627–644. https://doi.org/10.1113/jphysiol
.2006.113985
Lundgaard, I., B. Li, L. Xie, H. Kang, S. Sanggaard, J.D.R. Haswell, W. Sun, S.
Goldman, S. Blekot, M. Nielsen, et al. 2015. Direct neuronal glucose
uptake heralds activity-dependent increases in cerebral metabolism.
Nat. Commun. 6:6807. https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms7807
Lyons, D.G., A. Parpaleix, M. Roche, and S. Charpak. 2016. Mapping oxygen
concentration in the awake mouse brain. Elife. 5:e12024. https://doi
.org/10.7554/eLife.12024
Ma, Y., M.A. Shaik, S.H. Kim, M.G. Kozberg, D.N. Thibodeaux, H.T. Zhao, H.
Yu, and E.M.C. Hillman. 2016. Wide-field optical mapping of neural
activity and brain haemodynamics: Considerations and novel approaches. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 371:20150360. https://doi
.org/10.1098/rstb.2015.0360
MacGregor, G.G., K. Dong, C.G. Vanoye, L. Tang, G. Giebisch, and S.C. Hebert.
2002. Nucleotides and phospholipids compete for binding to the C
terminus of KATP channels. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 99:2726–2731.
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.042688899
Majmundar, A.J., W.J. Wong, and M.C. Simon. 2010. Hypoxia-inducible factors and the response to hypoxic stress. Mol. Cell. 40:294–309. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2010.09.022
Martin, G.M., C. Yoshioka, E.A. Rex, J.F. Fay, Q. Xie, M.R. Whorton, J.Z. Chen,
and S.-L. Shyng. 2017. Cryo-EM structure of the ATP-sensitive potassium channel illuminates mechanisms of assembly and gating. Elife. 6:
e24149. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.24149
Mart´ınez-François, J.R., M.C. Fernandez-Agüera, N. Nathwani, C. Lahmann, ´
V.L. Burnham, N.N. Danial, and G. Yellen. 2018. BAD and KATP channels
regulate neuron excitability and epileptiform activity. Elife. 7:e32721.
https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.32721
Masia, R., D.D. De Leon, C. MacMullen, H. McKnight, C.A. Stanley, and C.G.
Nichols. 2007. A mutation in the TMD0-L0 region of sulfonylurea
receptor-1 (L225P) causes permanent neonatal diabetes mellitus
(PNDM). Diabetes. 56:1357–1362. https://doi.org/10.2337/db06-1746
Masoud, G.N., and W. Li. 2015. HIF-1α pathway: Role, regulation and intervention for cancer therapy. Acta Pharm. Sin. B. 5:378–389. https://doi
.org/10.1016/j.apsb.2015.05.007
Matoba, T., H. Shimokawa, M. Nakashima, Y. Hirakawa, Y. Mukai, K. Hirano,
H. Kanaide, and A. Takeshita. 2000. Hydrogen peroxide is an
endothelium-derived hyperpolarizing factor in mice. J. Clin. Invest. 106:
1521–1530. https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI10506
Matsuno-Yagi, A., and Y. Hatefi. 1988. Estimation of the turnover number of
bovine heart F0F1 complexes for ATP synthesis. Biochemistry. 27:
335–340. https://doi.org/10.1021/bi00401a050
McCarron, J.G., and W. Halpern. 1990. Potassium dilates rat cerebral arteries
by two independent mechanisms. Am. J. Physiol. 259:H902–H908.
https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpheart.1990.259.3.H902
McCarron, J.G., M.D. Lee, and C. Wilson. 2017. The endothelium solves
problems that endothelial cells do not know exist. Trends Pharmacol. Sci.
38:322–338. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tips.2017.01.008
McClenaghan, C., A. Hanson, M. Sala-Rabanal, H.I. Roessler, D. Josifova, D.K.
Grange, G. van Haaften, and C.G. Nichols. 2018. Cantu syndromeassociated SUR2 (ABCC9) mutations in distinct structural domains result in KATP channel gain-of-function by differential mechanisms.
J. Biol. Chem. 293:2041–2052. https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.RA117.000351
McConell, G.K., G.D. Wadley, K. Le Plastrier, and K.C. Linden. 2020. Skeletal
muscle AMPK is not activated during 2 h of moderate intensity exercise
at ∼65% [Formula: See text] in endurance trained men. J. Physiol. 598:
3859–3870. https://doi.org/10.1113/JP277619
McGahren, E.D., J.M. Beach, and B.R. Duling. 1998. Capillaries demonstrate
changes in membrane potential in response to pharmacological stimuli.
Am. J. Physiol. 274:H60–H65. https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpheart.1998.274.1
.H60
McNay, E.C., and P.E. Gold. 2001. Age-related differences in hippocampal
extracellular fluid glucose concentration during behavioral testing and
following systemic glucose administration. J. Gerontol. A. Biol. Sci. Med.
Sci. 56:B66–B71. https://doi.org/10.1093/gerona/56.2.B66
McNay, E.C., R.C. McCarty, and P.E. Gold. 2001. Fluctuations in brain glucose
concentration during behavioral testing: Dissociations between brain
areas and between brain and blood. Neurobiol. Learn. Mem. 75:325–337.
https://doi.org/10.1006/nlme.2000.3976
Meng, G., J. Zhong, Q. Zhang, J.S.J. Wong, J. Wu, K.K. Tsia, and N. Ji. 2022.
Ultrafast two-photon fluorescence imaging of cerebral blood circulation
in the mouse brain in vivo. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 119:e2117346119.
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2117346119
Mercado, J., R. Baylie, M.F. Navedo, C. Yuan, J.D. Scott, M.T. Nelson, J.E.
Brayden, and L.F. Santana. 2014. Local control of TRPV4 channels by
AKAP150-targeted PKC in arterial smooth muscle. J. Gen. Physiol. 143:
559–575. https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.201311050
Mergenthaler, P., U. Lindauer, G.A. Dienel, and A. Meisel. 2013. Sugar for the
brain: The role of glucose in physiological and pathological brain
function. Trends Neurosci. 36:587–597. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tins
.2013.07.001
Metallo, C.M., and M.G. Vander Heiden. 2013. Understanding metabolic
regulation and its influence on cell physiology. Mol. Cell. 49:388–398.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2013.01.018
Miodonski, A., and A. Jasi ´ nski. 1979. Scanning electron microscopy of mi- ´
crocorrosion casts of the vascular bed in the skin of the spotted salamander, Salamandra salamandra L. Cell Tissue Res. 196:153–162. https://
doi.org/10.1007/BF00236356
Mironova, G.Y., P.M. Kowalewska, M. El-Lakany, C.H.T. Tran, M. Sancho, A.
Zechariah, W.F. Jackson, and D.G. Welsh. 2023. The conducted vasomotor response and the principles of electrical communication in resistance arteries. Physiol. Rev. In press.
Mita, M., M. Ito, K. Harada, I. Sugawara, H. Ueda, T. Tsuboi, and T. Kitaguchi.
2019. Green fluorescent protein-based glucose indicators report glucose
dynamics in living cells. Anal. Chem. 91:4821–4830. https://doi.org/10
.1021/acs.analchem.9b00447
Moshkforoush, A., B. Ashenagar, O.F. Harraz, F. Dabertrand, T.A. Longden,
M.T. Nelson, and N.M. Tsoukias. 2020. The capillary Kir channel as
sensor and amplifier of neuronal signals: Modeling insights on K+-
mediated neurovascular communication. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 117:
16626–16637. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2000151117
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 28 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
Mufti, R.E., S.E. Brett, C.H.T. Tran, R. Abd El-Rahman, Y. Anfinogenova, A.
El-Yazbi, W.C. Cole, P.P. Jones, S.R.W. Chen, and D.G. Welsh. 2010.
Intravascular pressure augments cerebral arterial constriction by inducing voltage-insensitive Ca2+ waves. J. Physiol. 588:3983–4005.
https://doi.org/10.1113/jphysiol.2010.193300
Murphy, M.E., and J.E. Brayden. 1995. Nitric oxide hyperpolarizes rabbit
mesenteric arteries via ATP-sensitive potassium channels. J. Physiol.
486:47–58. https://doi.org/10.1113/jphysiol.1995.sp020789
Nelson, M.T., and J.M. Quayle. 1995. Physiological roles and properties of
potassium channels in arterial smooth muscle. Am. J. Physiol. 268:
C799–C822. https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpcell.1995.268.4.C799
Nelson, M.T., H. Cheng, M. Rubart, L.F. Santana, A.D. Bonev, H.J. Knot, and
W.J. Lederer. 1995. Relaxation of arterial smooth muscle by calcium
sparks. Science. 270:633–637. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.270.5236
.633
Nichols, C.G. 2006. KATP channels as molecular sensors of cellular metabolism. Nature. 440:470–476. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature04711
Nichols, C.G., and W.J. Lederer. 1990. The regulation of ATP-sensitive K+
channel activity in intact and permeabilized rat ventricular myocytes.
J. Physiol. 423:91–110. https://doi.org/10.1113/jphysiol.1990.sp018013
Nickenig, G., and D.G. Harrison. 2002. The AT(1)-type angiotensin receptor in
oxidative stress and atherogenesis: Part I: Oxidative stress and atherogenesis. Circulation. 105:393–396. https://doi.org/10.1161/hc0302.102618
Noma, A. 1983. ATP-regulated K+ channels in cardiac muscle. Nature. 305:
147–148. https://doi.org/10.1038/305147a0
Norman, J.N., J. MacIntyre, J.R. Shearer Jr., I.M. Craigen, and G. Smith. 1970.
Effect of carbon dioxide on renal blood flow. Am. J. Physiol. 219:672–676.
https://doi.org/10.1152/ajplegacy.1970.219.3.672
Nose, K. 2000. Role of reactive oxygen species in the regulation of physiological functions. Biol. Pharm. Bull. 23:897–903. https://doi.org/10.1248/
bpb.23.897
Obel, L.F., M.S. Müller, A.B. Walls, H.M. Sickmann, L.K. Bak, H.S. Waagepetersen, and A. Schousboe. 2012. Brain glycogen-new perspectives on
its metabolic function and regulation at the subcellular level. Front.
Neuroenergetics. 4:3. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnene.2012.00003
Offenhauser, N., K. Thomsen, K. Caesar, and M. Lauritzen. 2005. Activityinduced tissue oxygenation changes in rat cerebellar cortex: Interplay
of postsynaptic activation and blood flow. J. Physiol. 565:279–294.
https://doi.org/10.1113/jphysiol.2005.082776
Ornelas, S., A.-A. Berthiaume, S.K. Bonney, V. Coelho-Santos, R.G. Underly,
A. Kremer, C.J. Guerin, S. Lippens, and A.Y. Shih. 2021. Three- ´
dimensional ultrastructure of the brain pericyte-endothelial interface.
J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 41:2185–2200. https://doi.org/10.1177/
0271678X211012836
Ottolini, M., K. Hong, E.L. Cope, Z. Daneva, L.J. DeLalio, J.D. Sokolowski, C.
Marziano, N.Y. Nguyen, J. Altschmied, J. Haendeler, et al. 2020. Local
peroxynitrite impairs endothelial transient receptor potential vanilloid
4 channels and elevates blood pressure in obesity. Circulation. 141:
1318–1333. https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.119.043385
Owen, M.K., F.A. Witzmann, M.L. McKenney, X. Lai, Z.C. Berwick, S.P.
Moberly, M. Alloosh, M. Sturek, and J.D. Tune. 2013. Perivascular adipose tissue potentiates contraction of coronary vascular smooth muscle: Influence of obesity. Circulation. 128:9–18. https://doi.org/10.1161/
CIRCULATIONAHA.112.001238
Oz, G., P.G. Henry, E.R. Seaquist, and R. Gruetter. 2003. Direct, noninvasive ¨
measurement of brain glycogen metabolism in humans. Neurochem. Int.
43:323–329. https://doi.org/10.1016/s0197-0186(03)00019-6
Oz, G., E.R. Seaquist, A. Kumar, A.B. Criego, L.E. Benedict, J.P. Rao, P.-G. ¨
Henry, P.F. Van De Moortele, and R. Gruetter. 2007. Human brain
glycogen content and metabolism: Implications on its role in brain
energy metabolism. Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab. 292:E946–E951.
https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpendo.00424.2006
Oz, G., M. DiNuzzo, A. Kumar, A. Moheet, and E.R. Seaquist. 2015. Revisiting ¨
glycogen content in the human brain. Neurochem. Res. 40:2473–2481.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11064-015-1664-4
Parpaleix, A., Y. Goulam Houssen, and S. Charpak. 2013. Imaging local neuronal activity by monitoring PO₂ transients in capillaries. Nat. Med. 19:
241–246. https://doi.org/10.1038/nm.3059
Patel, S., and S. Sharma. 2023. Respiratory acidosis. In StatPearls. StatPearls
Publishing, Treasure Island, FL.
Patel, A.B., J.C. Lai, G.M. Chowdhury, F. Hyder, D.L. Rothman, R.G. Shulman,
and K.L. Behar. 2014. Direct evidence for activity-dependent glucose
phosphorylation in neurons with implications for the astrocyte-toneuron lactate shuttle. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 111:5385–5390. https://
doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1403576111
Pellerin, L., and P.J. Magistretti. 1994. Glutamate uptake into astrocytes
stimulates aerobic glycolysis: A mechanism coupling neuronal activity
to glucose utilization. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 91:10625–10629. https://
doi.org/10.1073/pnas.91.22.10625
Peng, W., C. Tan, L. Mo, J. Jiang, W. Zhou, J. Du, X. Zhou, X. Liu, and L. Chen.
2021. Glucose transporter 3 in neuronal glucose metabolism: Health and
diseases. Metabolism. 123:154869. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.metabol.2021
.154869
Pipatpolkai, T., R.A. Corey, P. Proks, F.M. Ashcroft, and P.J. Stansfeld. 2020.
Evaluating inositol phospholipid interactions with inward rectifier
potassium channels and characterising their role in disease. Commun.
Chem. 3:147. https://doi.org/10.1038/s42004-020-00391-0
Porter, V.A., A.D. Bonev, H.J. Knot, T.J. Heppner, A.S. Stevenson, T. Kleppisch, W.J. Lederer, and M.T. Nelson. 1998. Frequency modulation of
Ca2+ sparks is involved in regulation of arterial diameter by cyclic
nucleotides. Am. J. Physiol. 274:C1346–C1355. https://doi.org/10.1152/
ajpcell.1998.274.5.C1346
Pratt, E.B., Q. Zhou, J.W. Gay, and S.L. Shyng. 2012. Engineered interaction between SUR1 and Kir6.2 that enhances ATP sensitivity in KATP
channels. J. Gen. Physiol. 140:175–187. https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp
.201210803
Prichard, J., D. Rothman, E. Novotny, O. Petroff, T. Kuwabara, M. Avison, A.
Howseman, C. Hanstock, and R. Shulman. 1991. Lactate rise detected by
1H NMR in human visual cortex during physiologic stimulation. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 88:5829–5831. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.88.13
.5829
Proks, P., H. de Wet, and F.M. Ashcroft. 2010. Activation of the K(ATP)
channel by Mg-nucleotide interaction with SUR1. J. Gen. Physiol. 136:
389–405. https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.201010475
Proks, P., H. de Wet, and F.M. Ashcroft. 2014. Sulfonylureas suppress the
stimulatory action of Mg-nucleotides on Kir6.2/SUR1 but not Kir6.2/
SUR2A KATP channels: A mechanistic study. J. Gen. Physiol. 144:
469–486. https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.201411222
Quinn, K.V., Y. Cui, J.P. Giblin, L.H. Clapp, and A. Tinker. 2003. Do anionic
phospholipids serve as cofactors or second messengers for the regulation of activity of cloned ATP-sensitive K+ channels? Circ. Res. 93:
646–655. https://doi.org/10.1161/01.RES.0000095247.81449.8E
Quistorff, B., Rabinowitz, J.D., and S. Enerback. 2020. Lactate: The ugly ¨
duckling of energy metabolism. Nat. Metab. 2:566–571. https://doi.org/
10.1038/s42255-020-0243-4
Raeis, V., P. Philip-Couderc, A. Roatti, W. Habre, J. Sierra, A. Kalangos, M.
Beghetti, and A.J. Baertschi. 2010. Central venous hypoxemia is a determinant of human atrial ATP-sensitive potassium channel expression: Evidence for a novel hypoxia-inducible factor 1alpha-Forkhead
box class O signaling pathway. Hypertension. 55:1186–1192. https://doi
.org/10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.109.148767
Raichle, M.E., and M.A. Mintun. 2006. Brain work and brain imaging. Annu.
Rev. Neurosci. 29:449–476. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.neuro.29
.051605.112819
Rasmussen, R., E. Nicholas, N.C. Petersen, A.G. Dietz, Q. Xu, Q. Sun, and M.
Nedergaard. 2019. Cortex-wide changes in extracellular potassium ions
parallel brain state transitions in awake behaving mice. Cell Rep. 28:
1182–1194.e4. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2019.06.082
Ratelade, J., N.R. Klug, D. Lombardi, M.K.S.C. Angelim, F. Dabertrand, V.
Domenga-Denier, R. Al-Shahi Salman, C. Smith, J.-F. Gerbeau, M.T.
Nelson, and A. Joutel. 2020. Reducing hypermuscularization of the
transitional segment between arterioles and capillaries protects against
spontaneous intracerebral hemorrhage. Circulation. 141:2078–2094.
https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.119.040963
Ray, R., C.E. Murdoch, M. Wang, C.X. Santos, M. Zhang, S. Alom-Ruiz, N.
Anilkumar, A. Ouattara, A.C. Cave, S.J. Walker, et al. 2011. Endothelial
Nox4 NADPH oxidase enhances vasodilatation and reduces blood
pressure in vivo. Arterioscler. Thromb. Vasc. Biol. 31:1368–1376. https://
doi.org/10.1161/ATVBAHA.110.219238
Reimann, F., F.M. Gribble, and F.M. Ashcroft. 2000. Differential response of
K(ATP) channels containing SUR2A or SUR2B subunits to nucleotides
and pinacidil. Mol. Pharmacol. 58:1318–1325. https://doi.org/10.1124/mol
.58.6.1318
Rhodin, J.A. 1967. The ultrastructure of mammalian arterioles and precapillary sphincters. J. Ultrastruct. Res. 18:181–223. https://doi.org/10.1016/
S0022-5320(67)80239-9
Rich, P.R. 2003. The molecular machinery of Keilin’s respiratory chain. Biochem. Soc. Trans. 31:1095–1105. https://doi.org/10.1042/bst0311095
Richardson, R.S., E.A. Noyszewski, K.F. Kendrick, J.S. Leigh, and P.D. Wagner. 1995. Myoglobin O2 desaturation during exercise. Evidence of
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 29 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
limited O2 transport. J. Clin. Invest. 96:1916–1926. https://doi.org/10
.1172/JCI118237
Ritterhoff, J., and R. Tian. 2017. Metabolism in cardiomyopathy: Every substrate matters. Cardiovasc. Res. 113:411–421. https://doi.org/10.1093/cvr/
cvx017
Rodriguez-Baeza, A., F. Reina-De La Torre, M. Ortega-Sanchez, and J. Sahuquillo-Barris. 1998. Perivascular structures in corrosion casts of the
human central nervous system: A confocal laser and scanning electron
microscope study. Anat. Rec. 252:176–184. https://doi.org/10.1002/(SICI)
1097-0185(199810)252:2<176::AID-AR3>3.0.CO;2-1
Rosano, G.M., and C. Vitale. 2018. Metabolic modulation of cardiac metabolism in heart failure. Card. Fail. Rev. 4:99–103. https://doi.org/10.15420/
cfr.2018.18.2
Rosehart, A.C., T.A. Longden, N. Weir, J.T. Fontaine, A. Joutel, and F. Dabertrand. 2021. Prostaglandin E2 dilates intracerebral arterioles when
applied to capillaries: Implications for small vessel diseases. Front. Aging
Neurosci. 13:695965. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnagi.2021.695965
Roth, K., and M.W. Weiner. 1991. Determination of cytosolic ADP and AMP
concentrations and the free energy of ATP hydrolysis in human muscle
and brain tissues with 31P NMR spectroscopy. Magn. Reson. Med. 22:
505–511. https://doi.org/10.1002/mrm.1910220258
Rouach, N., A. Koulakoff, V. Abudara, K. Willecke, and C. Giaume. 2008.
Astroglial metabolic networks sustain hippocampal synaptic transmission. Science. 322:1551–1555. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1164022
Rui, L. 2014. Energy metabolism in the liver. Compr. Physiol. 4:177–197.
https://doi.org/10.1002/cphy.c130024
Sagare, A.P., R.D. Bell, Z. Zhao, Q. Ma, E.A. Winkler, A. Ramanathan, and B.V.
Zlokovic. 2013. Pericyte loss influences Alzheimer-like neurodegeneration in mice. Nat. Commun. 4:2932. https://doi.org/10.1038/
ncomms3932
Sakadzic, S., E. Roussakis, M.A. Yaseen, E.T. Mandeville, V.J. Srinivasan, K. ´
Arai, S. Ruvinskaya, A. Devor, E.H. Lo, S.A. Vinogradov, and D.A. Boas.
2010. Two-photon high-resolution measurement of partial pressure of
oxygen in cerebral vasculature and tissue. Nat. Methods. 7:755–759.
https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.1490
Sancho, M., N.R. Klug, A. Mughal, M. Koide, S.H.l. Cruz, T.J. Heppner, A.D.
Bonev, D. Hill-Eubanks, and M.T. Nelson. 2022. Adenosine signaling
activates ATP-sensitive K+ channels in endothelial cells and pericytes in CNS capillaries. Sci. Signal. 15:eabl5405. https://doi.org/10
.1126/scisignal.abl5405
Satoh, E., M. Yamada, C. Kondo, V.P. Repunte, Y. Horio, T. Iijima, and Y.
Kurachi. 1998. Intracellular nucleotide-mediated gating of SUR/Kir6.0
complex potassium channels expressed in a mammalian cell line and its
modification by pinacidil. J. Physiol. 511:663–674. https://doi.org/10.1111/
j.1469-7793.1998.663bg.x
Schultz, S.G. 1997. Pump-leak parallelism in sodium-absorbing epithelia: The
role of ATP-regulated potassium channels. J. Exp. Zool. 279:476–483.
https://doi.org/10.1002/(SICI)1097-010X(19971201)279:5<476::AID
-JEZ10>3.0.CO;2-6
Segal, S.S., and B.R. Duling. 1989. Conduction of vasomotor responses in arterioles: A role for cell-to-cell coupling? Am. J. Physiol. 256:H838–H845.
https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpheart.1989.256.3.H838
Segal, S.S., D.N. Damon, and B.R. Duling. 1989. Propagation of vasomotor
responses coordinates arteriolar resistances. Am. J. Physiol. 256:
H832–H837. https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpheart.1989.256.3.H832
Seino, S., and T. Miki. 2003. Physiological and pathophysiological roles of
ATP-sensitive K+ channels. Prog. Biophys. Mol. Biol. 81:133–176. https://
doi.org/10.1016/S0079-6107(02)00053-6
Sepp, M., N. Sokolova, S. Jugai, M. Mandel, P. Peterson, and M. Vendelin.
2014. Tight coupling of Na+/K+-ATPase with glycolysis demonstrated in
permeabilized rat cardiomyocytes. PLoS One. 9:e99413. https://doi.org/
10.1371/journal.pone.0099413
Shi, Y., Z. Wu, N. Cui, W. Shi, Y. Yang, X. Zhang, A. Rojas, B.T. Ha, and C.
Jiang. 2007. PKA phosphorylation of SUR2B subunit underscores vascular KATP channel activation by beta-adrenergic receptors. Am.
J. Physiol. Regul. Integr. Comp. Physiol. 293:R1205–R1214. https://doi.org/
10.1152/ajpregu.00337.2007
Shi, Y., X. Chen, Z. Wu, W. Shi, Y. Yang, N. Cui, C. Jiang, and R.W. Harrison.
2008. cAMP-dependent protein kinase phosphorylation produces interdomain movement in SUR2B leading to activation of the vascular
KATP channel. J. Biol. Chem. 283:7523–7530. https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc
.M709941200
Shyng, S., and C.G. Nichols. 1997. Octameric stoichiometry of the KATP
channel complex. J. Gen. Physiol. 110:655–664. https://doi.org/10.1085/
jgp.110.6.655
Shyng, S.L., and C.G. Nichols. 1998. Membrane phospholipid control of nucleotide sensitivity of KATP channels. Science. 282:1138–1141. https://doi
.org/10.1126/science.282.5391.1138
Simpson, I.A., D. Dwyer, D. Malide, K.H. Moley, A. Travis, and S.J. Vannucci.
2008. The facilitative glucose transporter GLUT3: 20 years of distinction. Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab. 295:E242–E253. https://doi.org/10
.1152/ajpendo.90388.2008
Sirotin, Y.B., E.M.C. Hillman, C. Bordier, and A. Das. 2009. Spatiotemporal
precision and hemodynamic mechanism of optical point spreads in alert
primates. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 106:18390–18395. https://doi.org/10
.1073/pnas.0905509106
Song, H.W., K.L. Foreman, B.D. Gastfriend, J.S. Kuo, S.P. Palecek, and E.V.
Shusta. 2020. Transcriptomic comparison of human and mouse brain
microvessels. Sci. Rep. 10:12358. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020
-69096-7
Sonkusare, S.K., A.D. Bonev, J. Ledoux, W. Liedtke, M.I. Kotlikoff, T.J.
Heppner, D.C. Hill-Eubanks, and M.T. Nelson. 2012. Elementary Ca2+
signals through endothelial TRPV4 channels regulate vascular function.
Science. 336:597–601. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1216283
Sonkusare, S.K., T. Dalsgaard, A.D. Bonev, D.C. Hill-Eubanks, M.I. Kotlikoff,
J.D. Scott, L.F. Santana, and M.T. Nelson. 2014. AKAP150-dependent
cooperative TRPV4 channel gating is central to endotheliumdependent vasodilation and is disrupted in hypertension. Sci. Signal.
7:ra66. https://doi.org/10.1126/scisignal.2005052
Sonkusare, S.K., T. Dalsgaard, A.D. Bonev, and M.T. Nelson. 2016. Inward
rectifier potassium (Kir2.1) channels as end-stage boosters of
endothelium-dependent vasodilators. J. Physiol. 594:3271–3285. https://
doi.org/10.1113/JP271652
Spruce, A.E., N.B. Standen, and P.R. Stanfield. 1985. Voltage-dependent ATPsensitive potassium channels of skeletal muscle membrane. Nature. 316:
736–738. https://doi.org/10.1038/316736a0
Stamler, J.S., and G. Meissner. 2001. Physiology of nitric oxide in skeletal
muscle. Physiol. Rev. 81:209–237. https://doi.org/10.1152/physrev.2001
.81.1.209
Standen, N.B., J.M. Quayle, N.W. Davies, J.E. Brayden, Y. Huang, and M.T.
Nelson. 1989. Hyperpolarizing vasodilators activate ATP-sensitive K+
channels in arterial smooth muscle. Science. 245:177–180. https://doi
.org/10.1126/science.2501869
Stockli, J., D.J. Fazakerley, and D.E. James. 2011. GLUT4 exocytosis. ¨ J. Cell Sci.
124:4147–4159. https://doi.org/10.1242/jcs.097063
Straub, S.V., H. Girouard, P.E. Doetsch, R.M. Hannah, M.K. Wilkerson, and
M.T. Nelson. 2009. Regulation of intracerebral arteriolar tone by K(v)
channels: Effects of glucose and PKC. Am. J. Physiol. Cell Physiol. 297:
C788–C796. https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpcell.00148.2009
Straub, A.C., A.W. Lohman, M. Billaud, S.R. Johnstone, S.T. Dwyer, M.Y. Lee,
P.S. Bortz, A.K. Best, L. Columbus, B. Gaston, and B.E. Isakson. 2012.
Endothelial cell expression of haemoglobin α regulates nitric oxide
signalling. Nature. 491:473–477. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature11626
Straub, A.C., A.C. Zeigler, and B.E. Isakson. 2014. The myoendothelial junction: Connections that deliver the message. Physiology. 29:242–249.
https://doi.org/10.1152/physiol.00042.2013
Sugiura, K., S. Mihara, N. Fu, and T. Hisabori. 2020. Real-time monitoring of
the in vivo redox state transition using the ratiometric redox state
sensor protein FROG/B. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 117:16019–16026.
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1918919117
Sullivan, M.N., A.L. Gonzales, P.W. Pires, A. Bruhl, M.D. Leo, W. Li, A. Oulidi,
F.A. Boop, Y. Feng, J.H. Jaggar, et al. 2015. Localized TRPA1 channel Ca2+
signals stimulated by reactive oxygen species promote cerebral artery
dilation. Sci. Signal. 8:ra2. https://doi.org/10.1126/scisignal.2005659
Sung, M.W., Z. Yang, C.M. Driggers, B.L. Patton, B. Mostofian, J.D. Russo, D.M.
Zuckerman, and S.-L. Shyng. 2021. Vascular KATP channel structural
dynamics reveal regulatory mechanism by Mg-nucleotides. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA. 118:e2109441118. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2109441118
Tabula Muris Consortium. 2020. A single-cell transcriptomic atlas characterizes ageing tissues in the mouse. Nature. 583:590–595. https://doi
.org/10.1038/s41586-020-2496-1
Taggart, M.J., and S. Wray. 1998. Hypoxia and smooth muscle function: Key
regulatory events during metabolic stress. J. Physiol. 509:315–325.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-7793.1998.315bn.x
Tajada, S., C.M. Moreno, S. O’Dwyer, S. Woods, D. Sato, M.F. Navedo, and L.F.
Santana. 2017. Distance constraints on activation of TRPV4 channels by
AKAP150-bound PKCα in arterial myocytes. J. Gen. Physiol. 149:639–659.
https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.201611709
Takeda, Y., M.A. Nystoriak, M. Nieves-Cintrón, L.F. Santana, and M.F. Navedo. 2011. Relationship between Ca2+ sparklets and sarcoplasmic
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 30 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
reticulum Ca2+ load and release in rat cerebral arterial smooth muscle.
Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol. 301:H2285–H2294. https://doi.org/10
.1152/ajpheart.00488.2011
Tammaro, P., and F. Ashcroft. 2007. The Kir6.2-F333I mutation differentially
modulates KATP channels composed of SUR1 or SUR2 subunits.
J. Physiol. 581:1259–1269. https://doi.org/10.1113/jphysiol.2007.130211
Tantama, M., J.R. Mart´ınez-François, R. Mongeon, and G. Yellen. 2013.
Imaging energy status in live cells with a fluorescent biosensor of the
intracellular ATP-to-ADP ratio. Nat. Commun. 4:2550. https://doi.org/10
.1038/ncomms3550
Tao, X., J.L. Avalos, J. Chen, and R. MacKinnon. 2009. Crystal structure of the
eukaryotic strong inward-rectifier K+ channel Kir2.2 at 3.1 A resolution.
Science. 326:1668–1674. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1180310
Thakore, P., M.G. Alvarado, S. Ali, A. Mughal, P.W. Pires, E. Yamasaki, H.A.T.
Pritchard, B.E. Isakson, C.H.T. Tran, and S. Earley. 2021. Brain endothelial cell TRPA1 channels initiate neurovascular coupling. Elife. 10:
e63040. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.63040
Thompson, J.K., M.R. Peterson, and R.D. Freeman. 2003. Single-neuron activity and tissue oxygenation in the cerebral cortex. Science. 299:
1070–1072. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1079220
Thompson, J.K., M.R. Peterson, and R.D. Freeman. 2004. High-resolution
neurometabolic coupling revealed by focal activation of visual neurons. Nat. Neurosci. 7:919–920. https://doi.org/10.1038/nn1308
Thorens, B., and M. Mueckler. 2010. Glucose transporters in the 21st century.
Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab. 298:E141–E145. https://doi.org/10.1152/
ajpendo.00712.2009
Tran, C.H.T., M.S. Taylor, F. Plane, S. Nagaraja, N.M. Tsoukias, V. Solodushko, E.J. Vigmond, T. Furstenhaupt, M. Brigdan, and D.G. Welsh.
2012. Endothelial Ca2+ wavelets and the induction of myoendothelial
feedback. Am. J. Physiol. Cell Physiol. 302:C1226–C1242. https://doi.org/
10.1152/ajpcell.00418.2011
Trapp, S., S. Haider, P. Jones, M.S. Sansom, and F.M. Ashcroft. 2003. Identification of residues contributing to the ATP binding site of Kir6.2.
EMBO J. 22:2903–2912. https://doi.org/10.1093/emboj/cdg282
Tsoukias, N.M., D. Goldman, A. Vadapalli, R.N. Pittman, and A.S. Popel. 2007.
A computational model of oxygen delivery by hemoglobin-based oxygen carriers in three-dimensional microvascular networks. J. Theor.
Biol. 248:657–674. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtbi.2007.06.012
Tykocki, N.R., E.M. Boerman, and W.F. Jackson. 2017. Smooth muscle ion
channels and regulation of vascular tone in resistance arteries and
arterioles. Compr. Physiol. 7:485–581. https://doi.org/10.1002/cphy
.c160011
Tzou, W.S., C.E. Korcarz, S.E. Aeschlimann, B.J. Morgan, J.B. Skatrud, and J.H.
Stein. 2007. Coronary flow velocity changes in response to hypercapnia: Assessment by transthoracic Doppler echocardiography. J. Am. Soc.
Echocardiogr. 20:421–426. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.echo.2006.10.002
Urbach, V., E. Van Kerkhove, D. Maguire, and B.J. Harvey. 1996. Cross-talk
between ATP-regulated K+ channels and Na+ transport via cellular
metabolism in frog skin principal cells. J. Physiol. 491:99–109. https://doi
.org/10.1113/jphysiol.1996.sp021199
Vanlandewijck, M., L. He, M.A. Mae, J. Andrae, K. Ando, F. Del Gaudio, K. ¨
Nahar, T. Lebouvier, B. Laviña, L. Gouveia, et al. 2018. A molecular atlas
of cell types and zonation in the brain vasculature. Nature. 554:475–480.
https://doi.org/10.1038/nature25739
Vanzetta, I., and A. Grinvald. 2001. Evidence and lack of evidence for the
initial dip in the anesthetized rat: Implications for human functional
brain imaging. Neuroimage. 13:959–967. https://doi.org/10.1006/nimg
.2001.0843
Voet, D., J.G. Voet, and C.W. Pratt. 2016. Fundamentals of Biochemistry Life at
the Molecular Level. Wiley, Hoboken, NJ.
Voleti, V., K.B. Patel, W. Li, C. Perez Campos, S. Bharadwaj, H. Yu, C. Ford,
M.J. Casper, R.W. Yan, W. Liang, et al. 2019. Real-time volumetric microscopy of in vivo dynamics and large-scale samples with SCAPE 2.0.
Nat. Methods. 16:1054–1062. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-019-0579-4
Wagner, P.D. 2012. Muscle intracellular oxygenation during exercise: Optimization for oxygen transport, metabolism, and adaptive change. Eur.
J. Appl. Physiol. 112:1–8. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00421-011-1955-7
Wall, M., and N. Dale. 2008. Activity-dependent release of adenosine: A
critical re-evaluation of mechanism. Curr. Neuropharmacol. 6:329–337.
https://doi.org/10.2174/157015908787386087
Wang, X., J. Wu, L. Li, F. Chen, R. Wang, and C. Jiang. 2003. Hypercapnic
acidosis activates KATP channels in vascular smooth muscles. Circ. Res.
92:1225–1232. https://doi.org/10.1161/01.RES.0000075601.95738.6D
Wang, Z., Z. Ying, A. Bosy-Westphal, J. Zhang, B. Schautz, W. Later, S.B.
Heymsfield, and M.J. Müller. 2010. Specific metabolic rates of major
organs and tissues across adulthood: Evaluation by mechanistic model
of resting energy expenditure. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 92:1369–1377. https://
doi.org/10.3945/ajcn.2010.29885
Wang, F., Y. Cao, L. Ma, H. Pei, W.D. Rausch, and H. Li. 2018. Dysfunction of
cerebrovascular endothelial cells: Prelude to vascular dementia. Front.
Aging Neurosci. 10:376. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnagi.2018.00376
Weidemann, A., and R.S. Johnson. 2008. Biology of HIF-1α. Cell Death Differ.
15:621–627. https://doi.org/10.1038/cdd.2008.12
Weiss, J.N., N. Venkatesh, and S.T. Lamp. 1992. ATP-sensitive K+ channels
and cellular K+ loss in hypoxic and ischaemic mammalian ventricle.
J. Physiol. 447:649–673. https://doi.org/10.1113/jphysiol.1992.sp019022
Welsh, D.G., and S.S. Segal. 1998. Endothelial and smooth muscle cell conduction in arterioles controlling blood flow. Am. J. Physiol. 274:
H178–H186. https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpheart.1998.274.1.H178
Wende, A.R., M.K. Brahma, G.R. McGinnis, and M.E. Young. 2017. Metabolic
origins of heart failure. JACC Basic Transl. Sci. 2:297–310. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jacbts.2016.11.009
West, G.A., D.C. Leppla, and J.M. Simard. 1992. Effects of external pH on ionic
currents in smooth muscle cells from the basilar artery of the Guinea
pig. Circ. Res. 71:201–209. https://doi.org/10.1161/01.RES.71.1.201
Wilson, C., C.D. Saunter, J.M. Girkin, and J.G. McCarron. 2015. Pressuredependent regulation of Ca2+ signalling in the vascular endothelium.
J. Physiol. 593:5231–5253. https://doi.org/10.1113/JP271157
Wolfle, S.E., D.J. Chaston, K. Goto, S.L. Sandow, F.R. Edwards, and C.E. Hill. ¨
2011. Non-linear relationship between hyperpolarisation and relaxation
enables long distance propagation of vasodilatation. J. Physiol. 589:
2607–2623. https://doi.org/10.1113/jphysiol.2010.202580
Wray, S., and T. Burdyga. 2010. Sarcoplasmic reticulum function in smooth
muscle. Physiol. Rev. 90:113–178. https://doi.org/10.1152/physrev.00018.2008
Wu, J.-X., D. Ding, M. Wang, Y. Kang, X. Zeng, and L. Chen. 2018. Ligand
binding and conformational changes of SUR1 subunit in pancreatic
ATP-sensitive potassium channels. Protein Cell. 9:553–567. https://doi
.org/10.1007/s13238-018-0530-y
Wu, Z., Y. Cui, H. Wang, H. Wu, Y. Wan, B. Li, L. Wang, S. Pan, W. Peng, A.
Dong, et al. 2023. Neuronal activity-induced, equilibrative nucleoside
transporter-dependent, somatodendritic adenosine release revealed by
a GRAB sensor. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 120:e2212387120. https://doi
.org/10.1073/pnas.2212387120
Xi, Q., A. Adebiyi, G. Zhao, K.E. Chapman, C.M. Waters, A. Hassid, and J.H.
Jaggar. 2008. IP3 constricts cerebral arteries via IP3 receptormediated TRPC3 channel activation and independently of sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca2+ release. Circ. Res. 102:1118–1126. https://doi
.org/10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.108.173948
Xia, J., and B.R. Duling. 1998. Patterns of excitation-contraction coupling in
arterioles: Dependence on time and concentration. Am. J. Physiol. 274:
H323–H330. https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpheart.1998.274.1.H323
Xie, L.-H., S.A. John, and J.N. Weiss. 2002. Spermine block of the strong inward
rectifier potassium channel Kir2.1: Dual roles of surface charge screening and
pore block. J. Gen. Physiol. 120:53–66. https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.20028576
Yamada, M., S. Isomoto, S. Matsumoto, C. Kondo, T. Shindo, Y. Horio, and Y.
Kurachi. 1997. Sulphonylurea receptor 2B and Kir6.1 form a
sulphonylurea-sensitive but ATP-insensitive K+ channel. J. Physiol. 499:
715–720. https://doi.org/10.1113/jphysiol.1997.sp021963
Yamamoto, Y., K. Imaeda, and H. Suzuki. 1999. Endothelium-dependent
hyperpolarization and intercellular electrical coupling in Guinea-pig
mesenteric arterioles. J. Physiol. 514:505–513. https://doi.org/10.1111/j
.1469-7793.1999.505ae.x
Yamamura, H., Y. Suzuki, H. Yamamura, K. Asai, W. Giles, and Y. Imaizumi.
2018. Hypoxic stress upregulates Kir2.1 expression by a pathway including hypoxic-inducible factor-1α and dynamin2 in brain capillary
endothelial cells. Am. J. Physiol. Cell Physiol. 315:C202–C213. https://doi
.org/10.1152/ajpcell.00154.2017
Yamanishi, S., K. Katsumura, T. Kobayashi, and D.G. Puro. 2006. Extracellular lactate as a dynamic vasoactive signal in the rat retinal microvasculature. Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol. 290:H925–H934. https://
doi.org/10.1152/ajpheart.01012.2005
Yang, H.-Q., E. Subbotina, R. Ramasamy, and W.A. Coetzee. 2016. Cardiovascular KATP channels and advanced aging. Pathobiol. Aging Age Relat.
Dis. 6:32517. https://doi.org/10.3402/pba.v6.32517
Yang, H.-Q., W. Martinez-Ortiz, J. Hwang, X. Fan, T.J. Cardozo, and W.A.
Coetzee. 2020. Palmitoylation of the KATP channel Kir6.2 subunit promotes channel opening by regulating PIP2 sensitivity. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. USA. 117:10593–10602. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1918088117
Yang, A.C., R.T. Vest, F. Kern, D.P. Lee, M. Agam, C.A. Maat, P.M. Losada,
M.B. Chen, N. Schaum, N. Khoury, et al. 2022. A human brain vascular
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 31 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
atlas reveals diverse mediators of Alzheimer’s risk. Nature. 603:
885–892. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-021-04369-3
Yaniv, Y., M. Juhaszova, H.B. Nuss, S. Wang, D.B. Zorov, E.G. Lakatta, and S.J.
Sollott. 2010. Matching ATP supply and demand in mammalian heart:
In vivo, in vitro, and in silico perspectives. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 1188:
133–142. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1749-6632.2009.05093.x
Young, J. 1929. Malpighi’s “De Pulmonibus”. Proc. R. Soc. Med. 23:1–11. https://
doi.org/10.1177/003591572902300101
Yuan, H.-X., Y. Xiong, and K.-L. Guan. 2013. Nutrient sensing, metabolism,
and cell growth control. Mol. Cell. 49:379–387. https://doi.org/10.1016/j
.molcel.2013.01.019
Zambach, S.A., C. Cai, H.C.C. Helms, B.O. Hald, Y. Dong, J.C. Fordsmann, R.M.
Nielsen, J. Hu, M. Lønstrup, B. Brodin, and M.J. Lauritzen. 2021.
Precapillary sphincters and pericytes at first-order capillaries as key
regulators for brain capillary perfusion. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 118:
e2023749118. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2023749118
Zhao, C., and R. MacKinnon. 2021. Molecular structure of an open human
KATP channel. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 118:e2112267118. https://doi.org/
10.1073/pnas.2112267118
Zhao, G., H.C. Joca, M.T. Nelson, and W.J. Lederer. 2020a. ATP- and voltagedependent electro-metabolic signaling regulates blood flow in heart.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 117:7461–7470. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas
.1922095117
Zhao, G., H.C. Joca, and W.J. Lederer. 2020b. Dynamic measurement and
imaging of capillaries, arterioles, and pericytes in mouse heart. J. Vis.
Exp. https://doi.org/10.3791/61566
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 32 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024

HYPOTHESIS
Electro-metabolic signaling
Thomas A. Longden1,2 and W. Jonathan Lederer1,3
Precise matching of energy substrate delivery to local metabolic needs is essential for the health and function of all tissues.
Here, we outline a mechanistic framework for understanding this critical process, which we refer to as electro-metabolic
signaling (EMS). All tissues exhibit changes in metabolism over varying spatiotemporal scales and have widely varying
energetic needs and reserves. We propose that across tissues, common signatures of elevated metabolism or increases in
energy substrate usage that exceed key local thresholds rapidly engage mechanisms that generate hyperpolarizing electrical
signals in capillaries that then relax contractile elements throughout the vasculature to quickly adjust blood flow to meet
changing needs. The attendant increase in energy substrate delivery serves to meet local metabolic requirements and thus
avoids a mismatch in supply and demand and prevents metabolic stress. We discuss in detail key examples of EMS that our
laboratories have discovered in the brain and the heart, and we outline potential further EMS mechanisms operating in
tissues such as skeletal muscle, pancreas, and kidney. We suggest that the energy imbalance evoked by EMS uncoupling may
be central to cellular dysfunction from which the hallmarks of aging and metabolic diseases emerge and may lead to
generalized organ failure states—such as diverse flavors of heart failure and dementia. Understanding and manipulating EMS
may be key to preventing or reversing these dysfunctions.
Introduction
From the exquisitely elegant, computationally intense functions
of the brain to the error-free pumping of the heart across activity levels, there is a constant requirement that energy is
supplied to tissues and waste products are removed in an efficient manner. At the cellular level, the maintenance of ionic
gradients across the plasma membrane, protein synthesis and
transport, the processes of cell division, growth, and repair
(Buttgereit and Brand, 1995), and the diverse operations beyond
these are all inextricably tied to the ready availability of local
energy substrates. As these substrates are delivered via the
bloodstream, it makes all cells in all tissues critically dependent
on an optimized vascular function to direct blood to areas of
metabolic need at exactly the right moment. Understanding
exactly how this task is achieved throughout the body has engaged cardiovascular biologists since the earliest descriptions of
the circulatory system (Young, 1929; Harvey, 1957). Now with
the advent of modern molecular, electrophysiological, and imaging techniques, substantial progress has been made in determining the structure and function of the vascular system at high
resolution (Blinder et al., 2013; Tykocki et al., 2017; Vanlandewijck
et al., 2018; Hariharan et al., 2020; Kirst et al., 2020; Jackson,
2022; Meng et al., 2022). Together, these data enable precision
measurements of blood flow control spanning the molecular
to the systems levels. However, we still have an incomplete
understanding of how blood flow through tissues with highly
varied energetic demands is mapped to metabolic needs at the
organ, local network, and individual cell levels.
The EMS hypothesis
A diverse set of electro-metabolic signaling (EMS) mechanisms
operate throughout organ systems to precisely match local
energy demand with supply via capillary electrical signaling
to tightly control blood flow.
In this article, we set out the concept of EMS as a framework
to garner a new understanding of local blood flow control
mechanisms, which we have been developing over a number of
years (Lederer et al., 1996; Longden et al., 2017; Zhao et al.,
2020a). We hypothesize that this provides the core mechanistic link that enables the matching of energy demand to the delivery of increased blood flow across all organ systems (Fig. 1).
Here, we outline the theoretical basis of this unifying EMS hypothesis and underscore the technical developments that are
needed to accelerate progress in studying this phenomenon. The
core predictions made by the EMS hypothesis are:
............................................................................................................................................................................. 1
Department of Physiology, University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA; 2
Laboratory of Neurovascular Interactions, Center for Biomedical Engineering
and Technology, University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA; 3
Laboratory of Molecular Cardiology, Center for Biomedical Engineering and Technology,
University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.
Correspondence to Thomas A. Longden: thomas.longden@som.umaryland.edu; W. Jonathan Lederer: jlederer@som.umaryland.edu.
© 2024 Longden and Lederer. This article is distributed under the terms of an Attribution–Noncommercial–Share Alike–No Mirror Sites license for the first six months
after the publication date (see http://www.rupress.org/terms/). After six months it is available under a Creative Commons License (Attribution–Noncommercial–Share Alike
4.0 International license, as described at https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/).
Rockefeller University Press https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451 1 of 32
J. Gen. Physiol. 2024 Vol. 156 No. 2 e202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
• Energy-intensive processes in all organ systems should couple
to local hyperemia, as has been established for brain, heart,
and skeletal muscle among others.
• The signaling mechanisms that couple energy usage to
blood flow should satisfy the hallmarks of EMS, which we
outline below.
• EMS mechanisms operating in different organ systems should
share the same basis (Fig. 1) but may be tailored to suit the
particular spatiotemporal energy needs of the local tissue.
• Uncoupling of EMS should disrupt the matching of energy
supply to local demand and thereby may precipitate a range of
tissue dysfunction.
We explore these predictions in detail and outline key outstanding questions that need to be addressed to subject this
hypothesis to rigorous attempts at falsification.
Energy substrate supply and metabolism
The nanobattery adenosine triphosphate (ATP) stores energy
within its hydrolyzable phosphate–phosphate bonds that can be
tapped through serial chemical reactions to release energy to
power work throughout the cell. These reactions yield adenosine
diphosphate (ADP) and subsequently adenosine monophosphate
(AMP), which can then be further processed into adenosine.
Most often, however, ADP is rapidly phosphorylated back to ATP
to recharge the battery. Thus, cellular processes are primarily
fueled by the free energy liberated from the transfer of phosphoryl groups from ATP to acceptor molecules. The breaking of
the phosphoanhydride bonds between these groups (yielding
ADP and inorganic phosphate—Pi—if from ATP) enables the
work that undergirds the full gamut of complex cellular behaviors, ranging from motility and contraction to ion transport,
secretion, and the diverse reactions in cellular signaling. All
these processes are thus reliant on a range of metabolic enzymes
and mitochondrial functions, and the preferred carbon source
utilized for metabolism on a moment-to-moment basis differs
between tissues. In the brain, glucose is most heavily used
(Mergenthaler et al., 2013) while the heart often prioritizes lipid
sources (Goldberg et al., 2012).
Diverse energy buffers are also available, including glycogen
stored in the liver which can be mobilized to generate more
glucose on an as-needed basis. Circulating glucose is taken up
into cells via facilitated diffusion enabled by glucose transporters (GLUTs) and then catabolized through the subsequent
reactions of glycolysis, the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle
(Arnold and Finley, 2023), and oxidative phosphorylation
(Bonora et al., 2012; Fig. 2). The complete oxidation of a single
glucose molecule through these processes is estimated to yield
the formation of around 30 ATP molecules, although this
number varies between sources and may be modified as further
information becomes available (Rich, 2003).
Initially, glycolysis yields two ATP molecules during the
hydrolysis of a glucose molecule to two pyruvates. The latter can
then enter the TCA cycle in the mitochondria after conversion to
the high-energy intermediate acetyl coenzyme A (acetyl-CoA) to
produce the coenzymes nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide
(NADH) and flavin adenine dinucleotide (FADH2), which in turn
act as electron donors for the electron transport chain (ETC) in
Figure 1. An overview of EMS. EMS consists of three key stages (top) for which example inputs and outputs are given for an idealized tissue. This basic
framework can be applied to study EMS in different organ systems, but the molecules underlying initiation and transduction may vary. EMS is first initiated by
metabolic activity which causes a decrease in the availability of extracellular substrates and/or changes in intracellular energy status and an increase in
metabolic byproducts. In the second stage of EMS, this metabolic disturbance is sensed by the local vasculature and rapidly transduced into endothelial cell
membrane hyperpolarization via an increase in K+ channel activity, which will ultimately promote vasodilation and an increase in blood flow. Hyperpolarizing
signals are initiated in capillaries at the nexus of metabolic activity where capillary pericytes and endothelial cells play key roles in this process and are
transmitted either by passive electrotonic spread or by regenerative Kir2.1-mediated signaling upstream to areas of the vasculature covered in contractile cells
(i.e., contractile pericytes or smooth muscle cells). These contractile cells are induced to relax to produce an increase in blood flow, and this final output of EMS
delivers more substrates to the active region and has the effect of reversing the deviations from set-point of the initiating metabolic factors and homeostatically resets local metabolic reserves.
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 2 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
the inner mitochondrial membrane, wherein the flow of electrons through the protein complexes comprising the ETC culminate in the coupling of the electrochemical proton (H+)
gradient to oxidative phosphorylation, generating ATP via the
activity of ATP synthase (Fig. 2). In a system replete with energy
substrates, each mitochondrial ATP synthase produces in excess
of 100 ATP per second through this process, which can be increased to >400 ATP per second under catalytically optimal
conditions (Matsuno-Yagi and Hatefi, 1988). In intact cells, these
processes ultimately maintain a cytoplasmic ATP concentration
in the millimolar range (Greiner and Glonek, 2021), which is
typically several orders of magnitude higher than that of ADP
(free [ADP] in heart tissue has been estimated at 15 µM [Weiss
et al., 1992], in the brain at 12 µM [Roth and Weiner, 1991; Tabula
Muris Consortium, 2020], and in resting skeletal muscle at 6 µM
[Roth and Weiner, 1991]) and orders of magnitude higher still
than that of AMP (estimated at 71 nM in brain and 5 nM in
muscle [Roth and Weiner, 1991], and 250 nM in heart [Airan
et al., 2009]). The TCA cycle is the linkage point for the oxidation of all energy substrates, including fatty acids, lactate, ketone
bodies, and amino acids, which are through various mechanisms
processed to acetyl-CoA, which is then used to produce ATP
through the mechanisms described above (Arnold and Finley,
2023).
Ultimately the substrates and the oxygen (O2) required to
power the ETC are delivered in the blood via the plasma and its
O2-laden red blood cells (RBCs), respectively, which are directed
through the incredibly elaborate vascular networks of all tissues
(Box 1). To avoid deficits in energy supply, substrate delivery via
the blood needs to be matched precisely to the activity levels of
Figure 2. Metabolic cues for EMS. The basic metabolic processes occurring in all cells provide a rich tapestry of potential cues for EMS. Here, the oxidation of
glucose is depicted, showing several potential EMS cues in green. Initially, a substrate is transported into the cell cytoplasm for use. In this example, glucose is
brought in via GLUT transporters and then processed via the 10 reactions of glycolysis to yield two pyruvate molecules and two ATP, along with two NADH.
From here, pyruvate can be fermented to lactate, which can be released from cells via monocarboxylate (MCT) transporters. Alternatively, pyruvate can be
used to produce acetyl-CoA (also producing NADH and CO2 as a byproduct) that can enter the TCA cycle in the mitochondrial matrix. The TCA cycle reduces a
number of NAD+ molecules to NADH and FAD+ to FADH2, while also generating more CO2. The NADH and FADH2 in turn act as electron donors to the ETC in
the inner mitochondrial membrane to generate a proton gradient that ATP synthase (i.e., Complex V) uses to yield large amounts of ATP, which can then be
exported via the adenine nucleotide translocator in exchange for ADP. In addition to the generated CO2, lactate, or glucose levels themselves acting as cues, the
redox state of the cell or the ATP:ADP ratio may also signal to open K+ channels such as KATP to generate membrane hyperpolarization. Either ATP:ADP ratio in
the bulk cytosol or in submembrane regions around response elements could conceivably contribute to this process. The generation of these cues may occur
directly in the working cells of a given tissue such as cardiac myocytes in the heart, or in metabolic sentinel cells such as in pericytes in the brain.
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 3 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
organs and muscle at the most macroscopic levels, all the way
down to that of individual cells, while also being rapidly and
continually modulated to meet fluctuating local energetic needs.
Extensive work has uncovered the molecular mechanisms
through which the contractile state of smooth muscle cells
(SMCs) in arteries and arterioles is regulated to control perfusion (Segal et al., 1989; Segal and Duling, 1989; McCarron and
Halpern, 1990; Brayden and Nelson, 1992; Daut et al., 1994; Knot
and Nelson, 1995, 1998; Little et al., 1995a, 1995b; Nelson et al.,
1995; Bonev and Nelson, 1996; Dora et al., 1997, 2003; Haas and
Duling, 1997; Beach et al., 1998; Edwards et al., 1998; Porter et al.,
1998; Welsh and Segal, 1998; Jaggar et al., 2000; Jaggar, 2001;
Heppner et al., 2002; Ledoux et al., 2008; Xi et al., 2008;
Figueroa and Duling, 2009; Hannah et al., 2011; Mufti et al.,
2010; Takeda et al., 2011; Bagher et al., 2012; Dabertrand et al.,
2012, 2013; Sonkusare et al., 2012, 2014, 2016; Straub et al., 2012,
2014; Tran et al., 2012; Abd El-Rahman et al., 2013; Gonzales
et al., 2014; Harraz et al., 2014; Mercado et al., 2014; Earley
and Brayden, 2015; Sullivan et al., 2015; Wilson et al., 2015;
Garland et al., 2017; McCarron et al., 2017; Tajada et al., 2017; Lee
et al., 2018; Hald and Welsh, 2020; Ottolini et al., 2020;
Mironova et al., 2023), which is governed by control of the
membrane potential and intracellular Ca2+ levels. More recent
work is now revealing the role of the endothelial cells (ECs) of
capillaries and their closely associated pericytes calling for blood
flow increases and in the fine-tuning of the incoming flow of
blood (Beach et al., 1998; McGahren et al., 1998; Hall et al., 2014;
Longden et al., 2017, 2021; Harraz et al., 2018a, 2022; Lamb et al.,
2018; Gonzales et al., 2020; Moshkforoush et al., 2020; Zhao
et al., 2020a; Hartmann et al., 2021; Rosehart et al., 2021;
Thakore et al., 2021; Zambach et al., 2021; Hariharan et al., 2022;
Klug et al., 2023).
The milieu and signaling environments of the various organ
systems differ vastly throughout an organism, and thus the
question arises of how the continuous body-wide arterio–
capillary–venous network correctly integrates the thousands of
data streams arising from the diverse activities of local cells with
its relatively limited toolkit of protein sensors and actuators.
Here, we propose that the solutions to this problem lie in a set of
sophisticated yet generalized signaling mechanisms that ultimately convert increases in local energy demand into electrical
signaling throughout the vasculature and take center stage in
matching blood flow to metabolic needs in all tissues—a process
we refer to as electro-metabolic signaling or EMS (Fig. 1). We
outline this concept in detail and provide examples which we have
elucidated in the brain and the heart, along with key experimental
hallmarks that can be used to implicate this process in other tissues. We explore possibilities for the breakdown of EMS, which
may play an important role in a wide range of disease contexts
that involve mismatches between energy supply and demand, and
we detail the essential questions that need to be addressed to build
a complete view of the mechanistic landscape of EMS.
KATP channels are the key EMS transducers linking the cellular
metabolic state to an electrical signal
Central to EMS is the conversion of metabolic information
into electrical information that can be propagated through the
“wires” of the vasculature, and ATP-sensitive potassium (K+;
KATP) channels are uniquely suited to perform this task. Accordingly, we review below the key biophysical features of these
transducers, with a central focus on the vascular isoform of this
channel which makes an important contribution to EMS in the
brain, before discussing mechanisms through which KATP
channels may be engaged in response to changing the metabolic
state of the tissue.
KATP channels lie at the center of the EMS signaling network
and serve as the primary transducer that ties the internal cellular metabolic state to the membrane potential. These channels
thus can convert changes in the local metabolic environment
into electrical messages that can be transmitted over long distances (typically with the aid of Kir2.1 channels, as detailed
below) to the contractile cells of the vasculature (i.e., SMCs, and
the contractile pericytes of the proximal regions of the capillary
bed; Box 1).
The pore-forming subunits of KATP channels are members of
the Kir channel family (Inagaki et al., 1995; Hibino et al., 2010).
Currents through this family of channels depend on the driving
force for K+ (i.e., membrane potential [Em] minus EK). Accordingly, when Em is experimentally held at voltages negative to EK
(which does not occur under physiological conditions), Kir
channels conduct large, ohmic inward currents, but when Em is
positive to EK (as in healthy physiological conditions), outward
currents with varying degrees of inward rectification are
observed according to the channel subtype, causing the current–
voltage relationship to deviate from ohmic linearity. Rectification ranges from strong, in which only a small amount of current
flows from the interior of the cell to the exterior at potentials
positive to EK—as is the case for Kir2.1 channels which feature
prominently in electrical conduction, described below—to weak,
where rectification begins only at very positive potentials, tens
of millivolts from EK, as is the case for KATP channels (Hibino
et al., 2010).
The weakly rectifying current–voltage profile of KATP channels results mainly from intracellular Mg2+ block at positive
potentials (more positive than approximately −20 mV [Horie
et al., 1987]). The key property of these channels is that they
operate as exquisite molecular transducers coupling complex
changes in intracellular energy state to membrane electrical
activity. This stems from the unique sensitivity of KATP channels
to the ratio of intracellular ATP to ADP, being initially named for
the fact that when ATP levels increase, their K+ conductance is
inhibited (Noma, 1983). The basic structure of a functional KATP
channel is a hetero–octameric complex composed of four Kir6.x
subunits (either Kir6.1 or Kir6.2, encoded by KCNJ8 and KCNJ11,
respectively) and four sulphonyl urea receptor (SUR) subunits
(SUR1 or SUR2, encoded by ABCC8 or ABCC9, respectively;
Clement et al., 1997; Inagaki et al., 1997; Shyng and Nichols,
1997). Different Kir6.x/SURx subunit combinations create KATP
channels with differing nucleotide sensitivities and biophysical
characteristics. The resultant diversity of KATP channels are
widely expressed in cardiac myocytes (Noma, 1983), pancreatic
β-cells (Cook and Hales, 1984), skeletal muscle (Spruce et al., 1985),
neurons (Liss and Roeper, 2001; Ballanyi, 2004; Mart´ınez-François
et al., 2018), as well as vascular smooth muscle (Standen et al., 1989;
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 4 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
Beech et al., 1993; Sancho et al., 2022), endothelial cells (ECs; Aziz
et al., 2017; Sancho et al., 2022), and pericytes (He et al., 2018;
Vanlandewijck et al., 2018; Hariharan et al., 2020, 2022; Sancho
et al., 2022).
Box 1. Vascular organization and cell types
The vasculature is broadly segmented into arteries/arterioles, capillaries, and venules/veins, which coordinate distinct aspects of blood delivery. Arteries and
arterioles are composed of an inner lining of endothelial cells (ECs) that directly interface with the blood to convert luminal signals into a form that can be integrated by the overlying smooth muscle cells (SMCs; Fig. B1). The latter are the key contractile cells that, through actin–myosin crossbridge cycling, determine the
diameter of the lumen and thus the flow of blood flow into the capillaries. Control of SMC membrane potential and intracellular Ca2+ are central to this process.
Figure B1. Vascular organization and cell types. (A) Scanning electron micrograph (SEM) of a bifurcating arteriole covered in contractile smooth muscle
cells (SMCs; individual cells denoted in orange). Scale bar: 50 µm. (B) SEM of a contractile pericyte and its processes (pink) enwrapping a capillary. Note the
clear distinction from SMC morphology. Scale bar: 11.5 µm. A and B adapted with permission from Rodriguez-Baeza et al. (1998). (C) SEM of brain capillaries
showing the sequential branch ordering of vessels up to the fifth order (green). Note this system is not perfect, as some anastomosing vessels could be labeled
as two distinct orders (*). Scale bar: 50 µm. Adapted with permission from Krucker et al. (2006). (D) SEM of the choroid vasculature showing lobular vascular
architecture which makes it impossible to accurately assign branch orders (e.g., green vessels). 65× magnification. Adapted with permission from Miodonski ´
and Jasinski (1979) ´ .
In a number of vascular beds, capillaries are typically referred to by “branch order” in which the final SMC-covered arteriole is taken as the zero-order vessel,
and the initial capillary emanating from this is the first-order capillary. From here, branch numbering increases sequentially each time the capillaries branch,
regardless of vessel orientation or diameter. However, this classification system is difficult to apply in vascular beds in which the capillaries are highly anastomosing, such as heart, where this hierarchical ordering quickly breaks down by dint of the many reciprocal connections between adjacent capillaries (Longden
et al., 2023; Fig. B1). The capillaries are composed of exceptionally thin (∼100 nm) ECs that wrap around themselves once to form a lumen just wide enough to
allow RBCs to squeeze through in single file, experiencing significant mechanical forces as they go, and are covered by the cell bodies and processes of a range of
pericytes.
Using the brain as an example, at least three pericyte subtypes have been distinguished based on their locations in the capillary bed, their relative expression
of α-smooth muscle actin (α-SMA), and the appearance of their processes, designated ensheathing (or contractile) pericytes, mesh pericytes, and thin-strand
pericytes (Grant et al., 2019; Gonzales et al., 2020; Hariharan et al., 2020; Ratelade et al., 2020). Contractile pericytes (Fig. B1) cover the majority of the
parenchyma-facing surface of the first to approximately the fourth-order capillary ECs found immediately downstream of SMC-enwrapped penetrating arterioles
and heavily express α-SMA but have a distinct morphology to SMCs. Mesh pericytes are found immediately adjacent to the last contractile pericytes of a given
capillary offshoot and exhibit intermediate levels of vessel coverage and are α-SMA-negative. Finally, thin-strand pericyte (Hariharan et al., 2020) coverage begins
at approximately fifth-order branches and continues until the capillaries merge with the venular system (Grant et al., 2019). Each thin-strand pericyte has a unique
domain of extensive, exquisitely fine processes that stretch along the capillary surface for up to ∼300 µm (Berthiaume et al., 2018). Compared with contractile
pericytes, thin-strand pericytes express very low levels of α-SMA (Alarcon-Martinez et al., 2018; Vanlandewijck et al., 2018), suggesting that their contributions to
blood flow control mechanistically, in contrast with the rapid and dynamic regulation of the diameter of the underlying capillary orchestrated by their upstream
contractile counterparts (Hill et al., 2015; Gonzales et al., 2020; Zambach et al., 2021). Indeed, recently, the contractile abilities of thin-strand pericytes were
explored using optogenetic actuators and were revealed to be comparatively slower and smaller in magnitude, yet still capable of exerting a significant influence on
blood flow (Hartmann et al., 2021). Detailed studies of pericyte morphology and organization in other tissues are currently awaiting investigators’ attention.
RBCs transit the capillary bed, releasing their oxygen to the tissue as they go and are accompanied by nutrient-rich plasma from which energy substrates are
extracted and these are drained back toward the heart for recirculation initially in small venules and then in larger veins. The veins consist of the same components
as the arterioles, but here the smooth muscle is disorganized and non-contractile (Hill et al., 2015), and as such, these vessels do not substantially change their
diameter. In most tissues, luminal valves prevent the backflow of blood and pooling but these are absent from the brain where gravity assists drainage.
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 5 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
The most well-studied KATP isotype in pancreatic β-cells is
formed by Kir6.2 and SUR1 subunits (Noma, 1983; Inagaki et al.,
1995). In contrast, the “vascular” form of the KATP channel found
in SMCs, ECs, and pericytes is formed from Kir6.1 and SUR2
(Nelson and Quayle, 1995; Seino and Miki, 2003; He et al., 2018;
Vanlandewijck et al., 2018). SUR2 undergoes a range of alternative splicing events (Chutkow et al., 1999), which modulate
the nucleotide-binding properties and pharmacology of the
channel in its final form (Reimann et al., 2000). The variant
known as SUR2B, resulting from the excision of the final 129
coding base pairs plus 48 from the 39 untranslated region, is
thought to be the predominant isoform found in the vasculature
(Chutkow et al., 1999). In the heart, a combination of Kir6.2/
SUR2A gives rise to KATP channels that have distinct properties
from those in the vasculature and other locations. A number of
recent studies have solved the structures of several KATP channel
types at high-resolution by leveraging advances in single particle
cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM; Cheng, 2015; Cheng et al.,
2015), including a hamster SUR1–mouse/rat Kir6.2 hybrid complex and a human SUR1–Kir6.2 complex in both closed and open
states (Lee et al., 2017; Li et al., 2017; Martin et al., 2017; Zhao and
Mackinnon, 2021). Recently, Sung et al. (2021) provided the first
cryo-EM structures for the vascular Kir6.1/SUR2B KATP channel
in the presence of ATP and bound by the inhibitory compound
glibenclamide. This study determined that the architecture of the
vascular isoform of the channel exhibits key structural and
conformational features that are not observed in pancreatic KATP
channels prepared under similar conditions (Martin et al., 2017;
Wu et al., 2018), such as a displaced cytoplasmic domain as detailed below, which may confer distinct properties at the functional level that influence how these different channel subtypes
contribute to EMS.
Both Kir6.1 and Kir6.2 subunits are composed of two transmembrane helices bridged by an extracellular loop, which in
tetrameric assemblies generates the narrow portion of the pore
that comprises the highly conserved K+ selectivity filter, accompanied by cytoplasmic N- and C-terminal domains (Nichols,
2006). The hallmark feature of KATP channels is their regulation
of Em in response to changes in intracellular nucleotide concentrations (Table 1), which bind at several locations throughout
the channel complex. Micromolar ATP inhibits KATP channels
through a direct interaction with the Kir6.x subunit. Residues
R50 and K185 are essential for this ATP inhibition in Kir6.2, and
these positive charges are conserved at equivalent positions in
Kir6.1, but absent in most other ATP-insensitive Kir family
members (Trapp et al., 2003).
Because cytosolic intracellular ATP concentration is relatively high under physiological conditions, typically in the range
of 1–2 mM in SMCs (Larcombe-McDouall et al., 1999; Gribble
et al., 2000) and 5–10 mM in cardiac myocytes (Greiner and
Glonek, 2021), this can exert a powerful suppressive influence
on basal channel activity and is counterbalanced by the influences of other interacting molecules and signaling modifications
outlined below (Huang et al., 2019). Kir6.2 variants typically
exhibit higher free ATP sensitivity than Kir6.1-containing
channels (Table 1), and the recent structure provided by Sung
and colleagues reveals subtle differences that may contribute to
this distinction. In Kir6.1-containing channels, the cytoplasmic
domain of the pore-forming subunit is oriented ∼5.8 A further ˚
away from the membrane and rotated counterclockwise relative
to its Kir6.2 counterpart, allowing for fewer close residue interactions with ATP than are seen in the Kir6.2 ATP binding site.
This <1 nm difference in cytoplasmic domain positioning is thus
a possible contributory factor to the lower ATP sensitivity of the
vascular KATP isoform (Yamada et al., 1997; Satoh et al., 1998).
The large accompanying SUR subunits are members of the
ATP-binding cassette (ABC) membrane protein family and have
17 TM regions (Fig. 3). These regions are grouped into three
transmembrane domains: TMD0 (comprising TM1–TM5), TMD1
(TM6–TM11), and TMD2 (TM12–TM17). TMD0 is bound to the
channel α subunit via a bridging cytosolic loop referred to as L0,
which plays a crucial role in channel gating and activity, likely
by transmitting signals to the pore-forming subunit through
conformational rearrangements (Babenko and Bryan, 2003;
Masia et al., 2007; McClenaghan et al., 2018). Each SUR subunit
contains two nucleotide-binding domains (NBDs): one between
TMD1 and TMD2 (termed NBD1) and another in the C-terminus
following TMD2 (termed NBD2; Hibino et al., 2010; Lee et al.,
2017; Li et al., 2017; Martin et al., 2017). These NBDs are key sites
for nucleotide regulation and allow the interactions of magnesium (Mg2+)-bound adenosine diphosphate (Mg-ADP) and
Mg-ATP (as well as other Mg-nucleotides) to produce a key
stimulatory effect on KATP channel activity through NBD dimerization resulting in channel opening. Here, Mg-ATP binding
to NBD1 in conjunction with Mg-ADP binding to NBD2 promotes
dimerization, which leads to channel opening through conformational changes mediated via a structural element connecting
NBD1 to TMD2 known as the N1–T2 linker. At its C-terminal end,
this linker contains 15 glutamate/aspartate residues, forming a
region known as the ED domain. Molecular dynamics analyses
suggest that when MgADP is absent, electrostatic interaction
between NBD2 and the Kir6.1 cytoplasmic domain acts as an
autoinhibitory motif, preventing NBD2 dimerization with NBD1
and avoiding unregulated activation—consistent with low
spontaneous activity observed for the vascular form of KATP
channels (Fujita and Kurachi, 2000). The binding of MgADP to
NBD2 alters the shape of the ED domain, a reorganization that
allows the rotation of NBD2 toward NBD1 and thus promotes
dimerization and the transmission of a conformational change
that opens the channel.
A striking difference between the cardiac and vascular forms
of the KATP channel lies in the contrasting sensitivities of
channel activity to the membrane phospholipid phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate (PIP2). In Kir6.2-containing KATP
channels (Hilgemann and Ball, 1996; Baukrowitz et al., 1998), the
presence of PIP2 decreases the affinity of the channel for ATP
>100-fold and dramatically increases channel open probability
in the absence of nucleotides (Shyng and Nichols, 1998). In
contrast, the Kir6.1 form of the channel possesses a higher affinity for PIP2, with PIP2 binding so tightly as to render channel
activity insensitive to physiological fluctuations of this lipid, and
it has thus been suggested that this higher affinity may underlie
the more stable openings characteristic of vascular KATP channels (MacGregor et al., 2002; Quinn et al., 2003). In the context
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 6 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
of EMS, these observations collectively suggest that the mechanisms that engage KATP channels in cells expressing Kir6.2-
containing KATP channels, such as cardiac myocytes, may differ
from Kir6.1-expressing vascular cells. Indeed in the heart, with
its exceptionally high intracellular ATP levels (∼5–10 mM
[Greiner and Glonek, 2021]), modulation of membrane PIP2
levels might play an important role in creating the conditions for
KATP channel engagement. In the vasculature, by contrast, PIP2
concentration-related contributions are much less likely, and it
may be that changes in ATP:ADP ratio come to the fore in this
instance, or that other modulatory events such as coincident
channel phosphorylation are important for KATP activation.
In this vein, a stimulatory effect of protein kinase A (PKA)
has been observed for the activity of Kir6.1-containing channels.
PKA is activated by membrane Gs-coupled GPCRs that convert
ATP into cyclic AMP via adenylyl cyclase, which in turn promotes PKA engagement. PKA phosphorylation of multiple sites
(Ser-1351, Ser-1387) on the pore-forming and regulatory subunits of the KATP channel is known to produce a profound increase in channel open probability (Shi et al., 2007). Similarly,
PKG promotes KATP activation in the neuronal (Kir6.2/SUR1) and
cardiac (Kir6.2/SUR2A) forms of the channel (Han et al., 2001;
Chai and Lin, 2010; Chai et al., 2011), and vascular (Kir6.1/
SUR2B) KATP channels can also be engaged to generate membrane hyperpolarization by stimuli activating guanylyl cyclasecGMP signaling (Kubo et al., 1994; Murphy and Brayden, 1995),
which acts through PKG. In contrast, several consensus protein
kinase C (PKC) sites in the distal C-terminus of Kir6.1 have been
identified that mediate KATP inhibition. PKC is activated downstream of diacylglycerol (DAG), which is produced as a result of
GqPCR engagement and PIP2 hydrolysis. Therefore, activation of
any of the plethora of GqPCRs that are expressed in pericytes
(Hariharan et al., 2020) or cardiac myocytes (Litvinukov ˇ a et al., ´
2020) and other tissues is predicted to inhibit KATP channel
activity in the cell. When the serine residues that are the targets
of PKC phosphorylation (Ser-354, Ser-379, Ser-385, Ser-391, and
Ser-397) are mutated individually, moderate reductions in PKC
inhibition are observed, whereas combined mutation of these
residues produces greater effects, implying that the degree of
phosphorylation of KATP channels by PKC produces a graded
inhibition (Shi et al., 2008), allowing fine-tuning of activity.
In addition to these canonical signaling events, a number of
other modifications are known to affect KATP channel trafficking
and activity, including glycosylation (Conti et al., 2002), nitrosylation (Kawano et al., 2009), myristoylation (Lu et al., 2006),
and palmitoylation (Yang et al., 2020). Combined, these modes
of KATP regulation represent a rich and diverse molecular toolkit
for modifying KATP channel activity and density to influence the
membrane potential of the cell in response to a range of extracellular signals and across broad spatiotemporal domains.
Kir2 channels are central to transmission of electrical signals
Strong inward-rectifier K+ channels of the Kir2 family are
widely expressed and in the vasculature are functionally expressed in the plasma membranes of capillary (Longden et al.,
2017; Harraz et al., 2018a, 2018b) and arteriolar (Ahn et al., 2017;
Sonkusare et al., 2016) ECs and in SMCs (Longden et al., 2014;
Sonkusare et al., 2016). Three Kir2 channel subtypes (Kir2.1–2.3,
encoded by KCNJ2, KCNJ12, and KCNJ4) have been identified and
share similar structural and biophysical features, including their
near complete block by intracellular Mg2+ and polyamines as Vm
is progressively depolarized from EK, and sensitivity to blockade
by external barium (Ba2+) ions (Hibino et al., 2010). The crystal
structure of Kir2.2 (Tao et al., 2009) and more recently a cryoEM structure of Kir2.1 (Fernandes et al., 2022) have been solved,
revealing stunning details of these channels (Fig. 3).
Similar to the pore-forming region of the KATP channels described above, Kir2 channels are formed of tetramers of α
Table 1. Nucleotide and phosphoinositide regulation of KATP channel subtypes
Tissue location
(cell type)a
Subunit
config.
ATP inhibition
(IC50)
MgATP regulation
(EC50/IC50; µM)
MgADP activation
(EC50; µM)
PIP2 affinity
(ΔΔG; kJ/mol)
Refs
Pancreas (β cell) Kir6.2/SUR1 10–20 112–124b 8–11 38 Proks et al. (2010), (2014), Foster and
Coetzee (2016), Pipatpolkai et al. (2020)
Heart (cardiac
myocyte)
Kir6.2/SUR2A 21–100 541b 18 n.d.d Aguilar-Bryan and Bryan (1999),
Tammaro and Ashcroft (2007),
Pratt et al. (2012), Proks et al. (2014),
Foster and Coetzee (2016),
Pipatpolkai et al. (2020)
Vasculature
(smooth muscle)
Kir6.1/SUR2B 29–200 n.d.b 96c n.d.e Davies et al. (2010), Foster and
Coetzee (2016)
a
Note the possibility for a range of KATP isoforms to be expressed in an individual tissue, and that the listed isoforms may be found in other tissues, for example,
the “pancreatic” Kir6.2/SUR1 form of the channel is also found in neurons. b
Italicized text denotes IC50 values. Note that mutant channels (Kir6.2-G334D, Kir6.2-F333I) with reduced ATP sensitivity were used to reveal MgATP
sensitivities, as the effects of MgATP are normally strongly masked by inhibitory effects of free ATP. Similar mutants are needed to study MgATP regulation of
Kir6.1 containing channels in detail.
c
Measured in the presence of 10 µM pinacidil.
dLikely similar to Kir6.2/SUR1, above, as PIP2 binding free energy for Kir6.2 alone is 33 kJ/mol. e
Likely higher than for Kir6.1, as inferred from indirect measures in Quinn et al. (2003).
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 7 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
subunits, each of which has two transmembrane helices (termed
M1 and M2) that are connected via pore-forming loops and intracellular N- and C-termini and lack any accompanying accessory subunits (Fig. 3). The interaction of these channels with
PIP2 is critical for their activity, and readers are referred to
extensive discussion of PIP2 as a key modulator of ion channel
activity in elegant recent works for more detail (Hille et al., 2015;
Harraz et al., 2020). PIP2 binds to the Kir2.1 channel with a KD of
∼3 µM, and it has been proposed that such binding leads to a
conformational change in a conserved 15 amino-acid cytoplasmic motif known as the “G-loop” that leads to channel gating
(Fernandes et al., 2022).
Figure 3. K+ channels at the heart of EMS. (A) Topographic depiction of vascular KATP channel composition showing a two-transmembrane Kir6.1 subunit
alongside its much larger companion 17-transmembrane SUR2B. (B) Side-on cryo-EM density map of the vascular KATP channel in the presence of the inhibitor
glibenclamide. (C) Structural model of the data shown in B, showing the locations of the glibenclamide binding site (Glib), SUR nucleotide-binding domains
(NBDs), ATP binding sites (ATP), and the L0 linker, as well as several transmembrane domains (TMDs). (D) Top-down view of the channel as seen from the
extracellular side. (A–D) Modified with permission from Sung et al. (2021). (E) Side-on (left), top-down (upper right), and bottom-up (lower right) cryo-EM
density maps of the Kir2.1 channel at 4.3 A resolution. ˚ (F) Model of the data in E shows key structural features. K+ ions and blocking strontium ions (which
mimic Mg2+ ions) are shown in the pore in magenta and green, respectively. (G) Top-down model of the channel seen from the extracellular side showing
chains comprising the transmembrane domains in blue and disulfide bridges between subunits in red. (E–G) Modified with permission from Fernandes et al.
(2022).
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 8 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
The other major interaction of Kir2 channels that is essential
for understanding their function is their intracellular block by
polyamines and Mg2+ ions which underlies their strongly rectifying behavior. This has been attributed to two negatively
charged regions of the pore around residue D172 in the M2 helix
(Lu and MacKinnon, 1994) and the E224 and E299 residues close
to the G-loop (Kubo and Murata, 2001). The rings of negative
charge that these residues impart to the channel pore attract
positively charged blocking particles, which in turn is thought to
impair K+ permeation by hindering ion access to the selectivity
filter (Fernandes et al., 2022). As this blockade by polyamines
and Mg2+ depends on voltage, it can as a matter of course be
relived through membrane hyperpolarization toward EK. Hyperpolarization progressively lowers the probability that the
pore is occluded and thereby permits K+ exit from the cell down
the electrochemical gradient to generate outward hyperpolarizing K+ currents. Accordingly, there is a self-amplifying
effect inherent to Kir currents wherein the outward currents
permitted by hyperpolarization generate further hyperpolarization and thereby promote further relief of voltage-dependent
channel blockade (Longden and Nelson, 2015). A similar effect
can be achieved through the elevation of external K+, which
causes a rightward shift in the current–voltage profile of the
channel. In the context of the vasculature, where resting Vm is
between −30 and −40 mV, this rightward shift allows for relief of
the voltage-dependent block of the channel by promoting the
relief of the channel block at these potentials. We and others
have extensively reviewed the biophysical properties of Kir2
channels, and thus readers are directed to these articles for
further information on these topics (Hibino et al., 2010; Longden
and Nelson, 2015).
We argue below that the outward currents through Kir2
channels generated by membrane hyperpolarization, alongside
their K+ sensitivity, are critical for signal transmission from
capillaries during EMS.
The hallmarks of EMS
At its core, the input–output pattern of EMS is reflected in the
conversion of the level of local metabolic demand in a tissue into
electrical signaling throughout the vasculature (Fig. 1). Below,
we discuss three key stages that define this phenomenon: (1) the
generation of metabolic signals and the array of possible forms
they may take; (2) the sensing and transduction mechanisms that
generate vascular electrical signals, along with the propagation
mechanisms for these signals from capillaries to arterioles; and
(3) the homeostatic adjustment of blood flow to deliver energy
substrates to satisfy local metabolic needs.
Stage I: Elevated metabolic activity is the initiating input to EMS
The first hallmark of EMS is that it is driven by an elevation of
metabolic demand in the tissue (Fig. 1). This naturally results in
an array of complex intra- and extracellular modifications which
may act as triggering factors to initiate the adaptive blood flow
changes provided by EMS. Given the wide range of potential
energy sources and the enormous complexity of the cell’s metabolic pathways, there exists a vast array of biochemical signatures that could act as the initiation event for EMS in different
tissues. Here, we focus our discussion on currently known EMS
signals and exciting unexplored possibilities.
Decreased substrate availability as an EMS trigger. Perhaps
operating most directly as an initiating factor, a decrease in local
energy substrate availability due to uptake or depletion during
activity may act as a primary driver of EMS. Indeed, we recently
demonstrated that this is the case for brain glucose, where
capillary pericytes sense and respond to local glucose availability
(Hariharan et al., 2022), and similar mechanisms may exist for
other energy substrates.
Many cells express glucose transporters (GLUTs) to directly
take up glucose from their environment. GLUTs are facilitative
transporters that utilize the gradient of glucose to direct it to
locations of relatively low concentration and have varying kinetics and affinities which can be modulated by intracellular
signaling pathways, such that glucose uptake can be modified in
an activity-dependent manner (Thorens and Mueckler, 2010).
For example, the membrane density of GLUT4 proteins can be
rapidly adjusted in response to signaling events. In muscle and
fat cells, GLUT4 is under the direct control of insulin signaling,
the elevation of which results in rapid membrane insertion of
reserve pools of this transporter stored in submembrane vesicles, thereby rapidly augmenting the glucose import capacity of
the cell (Stockli et al., 2011 ¨ ). Increasing glucose import via such
mechanisms can lead to an increase in the breakdown and oxidation of glucose by active cells, and this can in turn rapidly
change local external glucose concentrations.
Brain regional glucose has been observed to fall ∼30% from
its resting level of ∼1 mM during a maze task (McNay et al.,
2001), presumably due to its rapid uptake by neurons
(Lundgaard et al., 2015; Li et al., 2023) or local astrocytes
(Pellerin and Magistretti, 1994; Rouach et al., 2008), with onset
on the order of seconds (Gold and Korol, 2012). Interestingly, in
aged animals, depletion of local glucose during the same task is
even more extreme, reaching a nadir of ∼50% below resting
levels during task performance (McNay and Gold, 2001), which
could further increase metabolic strain on highly active neurons.
In younger animals, the drop in glucose is typically sustained for
some time during task performance and then corrected back to
baseline levels (McNay et al., 2001), suggesting perhaps that the
initial dearth of glucose could act as a signal to the vasculature to
indicate local metabolic activation and prompt the initiation of
EMS to correct the supply deficit.
Tight control of local glucose is essential in the brain, which
operates as an on-demand system relying almost exclusively on
incoming glucose transported across the blood–brain barrier by
the heavily expressed GLUTs, in particular the GLUT1 isoform
(Deng et al., 2014), located in the endothelium and astrocytic
endfeet (Mergenthaler et al., 2013). A prevailing view is that
glucose is taken up into astrocytic endfeet during neuronal activity via GLUT1 transporters prompted by glutamatergic signaling and glutamate uptake at the tripartite synapse, and this
promotes glycolysis leading to the generation of pyruvate. This
generated pyruvate is then converted to lactate (by lactate dehydrogenase [LDH] 5) in astrocytes, which is passed via monocarboxylate transporters (MCTs 4 and 1) into the extracellular
space, and MCT2 on neurons then permits its uptake into these
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 9 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
cells. It is suggested that the lactate accumulated in neurons is
then converted by resident LDH1 into pyruvate which can enter
the TCA cycle to ultimately generate ATP via oxidative phosphorylation (Mergenthaler et al., 2013). This mechanism has
been termed the astrocyte-neuron lactate shuttle (ANLS).
However, recent studies have questioned the extent to which
neurons depend on astrocytes to provide lactate as a fuel via this
mechanism, as opposed to taking up glucose directly from their
immediate environment and processing this with their own
metabolic machinery (Chuquet et al., 2010; Lundgaard et al.,
2015). Indeed, GLUT3, which has a higher glucose transport
rate than GLUT1 (Simpson et al., 2008), is expressed by neurons
to enable their direct uptake of glucose from the surrounding
parenchyma, and this has led to a counterview in which neurons
process their own glucose for glycolysis and oxidative phosphorylation (Patel et al., 2014; Lundgaard et al., 2015; Peng et al.,
2021), in the process releasing lactate into the extracellular space
(Dienel, 2012). Further work is needed to establish exactly how
glucose is handled by these two cell types.
The brain also maintains a diminutive reservoir of glycogen
(Choi and Gruetter, 2003; Oz et al., 2003 ¨ , 2015; DiNuzzo, 2019),
which accounts for a low percentage of total glucose metabolism
during normal operations and is at least 20 times smaller than
reserves stored in muscle, and 50–100 times lower than that
sequestered in the liver (Ö
z et al., 2007; Obel et al., 2012). Thus,
while the brain appears to depend directly on local glucose on an
as-needed basis, in systems with significant glycogen reserves
these may be mobilized as glucose levels fall to provide sustained
buffering for energy production, and thus EMS may turn on
over a longer and more gradual time scale or may depend on
other triggering factors.
Intriguingly, several GLUT isoforms are expressed directly in
SMCs and pericytes, including transcripts for GLUT1, GLUT3,
and GLUT4 (He et al., 2018; Vanlandewijck et al., 2018). The
relative activity of these transporters could influence the sensitivity of EMS mechanisms embedded in the vasculature. For
example, if GLUT4 transporters are active in the membrane as
opposed to sequestered in reserve pools this could reduce the
sensitivity of vascular EMS mechanisms to glucose fluctuations
by maintaining higher intracellular ATP levels. These possibilities for tuning EMS and their consequences for blood flow
control are intriguing avenues for future investigation.
Cytosolic ATP as a driver of EMS. The major mechanism
through which the energy substrates that are taken into a cell
are converted into ATP is mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation. This process will set the bulk ATP level in the cytosol,
which is typically within the millimolar range, as noted above.
Although many mechanisms exist to protect and maintain cytosolic ATP concentrations, it is possible that subtle fluctuations
in bulk ATP could drive EMS via KATP channel activity.
The organization, function, and regulation of KATP channels
are likely to reflect the EMS mechanisms deployed by a given
cell type. At one extreme are the cardiac ventricular myocytes,
wherein the KATP channel density is extremely high (∼10
channels/µm2
, corresponding to around 50,000 channels per
cell; Nichols and Lederer, 1990). This high expression of the
KATP channel is appropriate for the 5–10 mM cytosolic ATP
concentration estimated from NMR data (Greiner and Glonek,
2021) when considered alongside the low IC50 for ATP at the
cardiac isoform of the KATP channel (∼21–100 µM; Table 1; Foster
and Coetzee, 2016). Having thousands of KATP channels in the
membrane will increase sensitivity to small dips in ATP, which
will likely increase their open probability only marginally. Given
the large single channel current (∼80 pS; Foster and Coetzee,
2016), a single channel opening is capable of deflecting the
membrane potential substantially, and thus this could thus
tightly couple small changes in ATP to EMS mechanisms in
the heart.
Similar measurements are needed to inform our understanding of the possibilities for KATP channel control throughout
the vasculature in pericytes, SMCs, and ECs (and of course also
in other cell types expressing KATP channels), as channel membrane density and intracellular ATP levels and dynamics are
thought to be key parameters that contribute to EMS control
mechanisms. For example, at the opposite extreme to cardiac
myocytes would be a small cell working as a metabolic sentinel to
influence local blood flow by directly modulating electrical activity in the vascular system, like capillary pericytes in the
brain (Hariharan et al., 2022). Such cells would benefit from
having local intracellular machinery to make and control ATP
directly around the channel in a submembrane region of
the cell. Very tight coupling between extracellular substrate
availability and submembrane ATP would thereby allow tight
and responsive control of the KATP channel to rapidly produce
hyperpolarizing electrical signals, a concept we explore in more
detail below.
Glycolytic-KATP channel complexes: Potential EMS signaling
microdomains responding to localized changes intracellular energy
status. Upon entering the cell cytosol glucose is broken down
via a series of 10 enzymatic reactions to produce ATP, pyruvate,
and NADH. Intriguingly, a range of glycolytic enzymes, including aldolase A, pyruvate kinase, triosephosphate isomerase, and
glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) have been
found to be physically associated with KATP channels in cardiac
membranes in studies using a combination of two-hybrid
screening, GST pulldown and immunoprecipitation (DharChowdhury et al., 2005; Jovanovic et al., 2005 ´ ; Hong et al.,
2011). More recently, a glycolytic metabolon regulating the
KATP channel has been described in pancreatic membranes
(Ho et al., 2023). These close associations may provide a
direct means through which highly localized metabolism of
glucose in the submembrane environment could be directly
coupled to KATP activity.
Such local organization to enable compartmentalized communication could be critically important for tight control of KATP
activity, as even during vigorous activity global ATP levels are
closely safeguarded (Balaban, 1986) and thus the global concentration change in a typical cell is minimal. Many intracellular
homeostatic mechanisms have evolved to preserve this high
concentration of available intracellular ATP. Examples abound:
creatine kinase, found in skeletal and heart muscle, in the brain,
and in the mitochondria of various tissues, plays an important
role in producing creatine-phosphate when ATP demands are
low, which acts as an immediately available energy reservoir
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 10 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
that can be drawn upon to generate ATP from ADP during periods of intense work (Yaniv et al., 2010; Metallo and Vander
Heiden, 2013); phosphofructokinase-1 (PFK-1), a rate-limiting
enzyme that performs the third reaction in the glycolytic
chain (Jenkins et al., 2011), is allosterically controlled—when
ATP is replete, PFK-1 is inhibited, but as energy availability falls
within the cell and ADP and AMP levels rise its activity is promoted with the effect of buffering ATP levels by modulating
glycolytic rate which can be tuned over a 100-fold range (Voet
et al., 2016). There are many further examples of regulatory
processes that operate to protect ATP availability, and as such it
is unlikely that a decrease in intracellular ATP per se operates
widely as a trigger of EMS mechanisms. (Although, note the
example of the high density of KATP channels in cardiac membranes in the preceding section, which offers a simple emergent
solution to the problem of sensing subtle changes in ATP.)
As intracellular ADP and AMP levels are typically several
orders of magnitude below ATP in a cell at rest, their relative
variance is much more dramatic during cellular activity. Indeed,
as working muscle ramps its ATP turnover rate, ADP levels have
been estimated to increase as much as fivefold (Allen et al., 1997)
and AMP levels even more so (McConell et al., 2020). The
combination of relatively stable ATP levels as a backdrop against
substantial relative changes in ADP thus decreases the ATP:ADP
ratio—a key intracellular energy parameter that influences a
wide range of intracellular metabolic activities which may be
more likely to be a key EMS cue. Recently, the development
of a highly sensitive reporter of ATP:ADP ratio, PercevalHR
(Tantama et al., 2013), has allowed for the first single-cell resolution observations of changes in this metabolic indicator. Intriguingly, this sensor revealed that decreases in external
glucose around neurons within the physiological range result in
a substantial decrease in ATP:ADP ratio. Electrical activity was
also directly linked to changes in ratio, and these were directly
linked to hyperpolarization of the membrane through the engagement of KATP channels (Tantama et al., 2013). As such,
activity-induced changes in ATP:ADP ratio primarily resulting
from relative changes in ADP concentrations likely represent a
more labile metabolic parameter than bulk ATP that can be
rapidly converted into robust electrical activity in cells expressing KATP channels, which could be a central trigger for
blood flow increases in EMS. In vascular cells expressing KATP
for example, it is anticipated that the ATP:ADP ratio will tilt in
favor of channel activation (i.e., higher ADP, lower ATP) during
local substrate depletion in the tissue to generate electrical signals and promote hyperemia.
Returning to the observation that KATP channels physically
associate with glycolytic machinery, the substrates of aldolase
and pyruvate kinase were both shown to suppress KATP channel
activity in excised membrane patches (Hong et al., 2011), and
these observations are buttressed by similar findings in vesicles
containing KATP channels derived from small intestine epithelial
cells (Dubinsky et al., 1998). It thus follows that the glycolytic
machinery of the cell may constitute part of a macromolecular
signaling complex organized around KATP channels that tightly
regulates their activity. A decrease in glycolysis could trigger a
rapid increase in microdomain ADP around the channel (and
potentially a fall in submembrane ATP), which could increase
KATP activity. Accordingly, the KATP channel in certain situations
may be set up to sense a functionally compartmentalized ATP:
ADP ratio in the submembrane region around the channel, as
opposed to that of the bulk cytoplasm. Such a privileged environment would presumably serve to amplify subtle changes in
metabolism and enable the KATP channel to be rapidly responsive. A number of studies also suggest that the sodium/potassium (Na+/K+) ATPase is associated with this membrane complex
of glycolytic enzymes and KATP channels, which may add a further dimension to this organization (Urbach et al., 1996; Schultz,
1997; Dubinsky et al., 1998; Sepp et al., 2014): ATP from microdomain glycolysis could fuel pumping activity to restore Na+ and
K+ levels after membrane potential deviations. Such increases in
Na+/K+ ATPase activity would be expected to affect the local ATP:
ADP ratio and increase KATP channel activity. While it is yet to
be determined whether such highly localized glycolytic-KATP
channel complexes contribute to EMS, this is an intuitive and
appealing possibility.
Beyond glucose, variations in the availability of other energy
substrates could trigger EMS through similar principles but the
involvement of distinct molecular players. The heart, in contrast
to the brain, has been described as “omnivorous,” in that it
generates ATP from an array of substrates (Wende et al., 2017).
Under normal conditions in healthy adults, free fatty acid oxidation takes center-stage in heart metabolism, generating
acetyl-coA, which is then utilized to produce ATP via oxidative
phosphorylation. In contrast, catabolism of glucose makes only a
small contribution to cardiac energy under working conditions
(e.g., only 5% of ATP is produced by glycolysis), but this balance
may shift when the heart is under stress. Further contributions
to heart metabolism are provided by amino acids, ketone bodies,
and circulating lactate (Ritterhoff and Tian, 2017).
The kidney also has incredibly high energy demands, turning
over large amounts of ATP to enable its roles in filtering waste
from the blood, reabsorbing nutrients, and regulating pH and
blood pressure. This organ exhibits regional dependence on
energy substrate preference, with the proximal tubules in the
renal cortex relying on the oxidation of free fatty acids to generate large amounts of ATP to accommodate the high level of
water and solute transport occurring at this location (indeed, the
complete β-oxidation of a fatty acid molecule is more energetically lucrative than glucose oxidation—for example, the 16-
carbon fatty acid palmitate will yield 106 ATP versus ∼32 ATP
per glucose molecule). The lower O2 environment of the medulla
and distal tubules relies instead on glucose for glycolysis (Alsahli
and Gerich, 2017; Bhargava and Schnellmann, 2017). These
variances in energy preferences across organs, locally within
tissues, and under different circumstances thus raise the possibility that fluctuations in local availability of a range of energy
substrates may alter intracellular energy status to then activate
EMS in a substrate-tailored and location-dependent manner.
Metabolically driven release of mediators. Increased metabolic
activity may also drive the release of canonical vasodilatory
mediators from active tissue. These may include (but are not
limited to) adenosine, which is a direct product of the breakdown of ATP via ADP and AMP and is released in the brain (Wall
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 11 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
and Dale, 2008; Wu et al., 2023), skeletal muscle (Hellsten et al.,
1998), and heart during increased activity (Hori and Kitakaze,
1991); K+ which, while not a direct metabolic byproduct, is released during action potentials and thus accurately reflects local
activity in electrically active tissues (Ballanyi et al., 1996;
Rasmussen et al., 2019); and NO, a diffusible gas which is produced in response to Ca2+ elevations in metabolically active tissues such as the brain (Garthwaite, 2019) and skeletal muscle
(Stamler and Meissner, 2001). The documentation of metabolically driven mediators is underway in a range of tissues, and a
full accounting of these will be necessary to gain a complete
understanding of the diverse EMS mechanisms throughout tissues, several of which may operate in parallel to ensure
the fidelity of energy delivery in response to changes in local
metabolism. One mediator that is a direct product of metabolism and is therefore well suited for EMS is lactate.
Lactate as a signaling molecule. Pyruvate generated during
glycolysis can be metabolized by LDH enzymes to lactic acid
which ionizes to form lactate, at the same time generating NAD+.
This is a reversible reaction in which lactate and NAD+ can also
be converted into NADH and pyruvate. In the brain, the reversibility of this reaction forms the basis of the ANLS model,
although observations of lactate flux favoring brain exit to the
circulation have questioned the extent to which this mechanism
is favored for neuronal ATP generation (Dienel, 2012). Nevertheless, lactate levels in the brain clearly do increase during
activity (Prichard et al., 1991; Hu and Wilson, 1997a, 1997b), and
interestingly the activity of KATP channels in neocortical neurons has been shown to be modulated by the level of extracellular lactate, with its accumulation inhibiting KATP channels
composed of Kir6.2 and SUR1 subunits after its transport into
cells and subsequent metabolism, thus depolarizing the cell
membrane and increasing firing rate (Karagiannis et al., 2021).
Intriguingly, activation of vascular KATP channels by intracellular lactate has been observed in SMCs (Han et al., 1993), resulting instead in membrane hyperpolarization. These disparate
observations raise the need for further work to determine the
precise fate of lactate in the brain and delineate the responses of
different cells of the neurovascular unit to local extra- and intracellular lactate levels and establish underlying mechanisms.
One consistent observation, however, is that accumulation of
lactate causes vasodilation of local arterioles and arterioleproximate capillaries through several mechanisms including
modulation of contractile pericyte Ca2+ (Yamanishi et al., 2006),
nitric oxide (NO)–dependent activation of vascular KATP channels (Hein et al., 2006), and the actions of extracellular prostaglandin E2 (Gordon et al., 2008). While further work is needed to
determine the relative contributions of these mechanisms to
blood flow control in arterioles and throughout the capillary bed,
these observations suggest that the increases in lactate that occur in the brain during concerted activity can be sensed by the
vasculature and converted into hyperemia, thus fitting the
profile of an EMS signaling molecule.
Beyond the flow of brain lactate into the vascular system, the
levels of lactate in the blood are strongly correlated to the level of
lactate in working muscle, and a major fate of this molecule is to
be transported to the liver where it is used to synthesize glucose
or glycogen through the processes of gluconeogenesis and glyconeogenesis (Rui, 2014). However, it is also evident that circulating lactate can be directly taken up by cells as a carbon
source (Quistorff et al., 2020) and this raises the possibility
of whole-organism activity and energy state regulating EMS
broadly throughout a number of tissues. For example, during
intense whole-animal activity, the release of lactate could act as
an EMS trigger in skeletal muscle as noted in the previous section, and the increase in circulating lactate could also drive EMS
through its import into the heart (Duncker and Bache, 2008) and
brain, if the blood concentration is sufficiently high enough to
favor influx (Quistorff et al., 2020). Such a mechanism for lactate triggering coordinated blood flow increases across multiple
organs could serve to rapidly optimize energy delivery during
activity and represents an intriguing avenue for further
exploration.
Gases as metabolic indicators: pO2 and pCO2. Oxidative metabolic pathways converge on the generation of acetyl-coA in the
mitochondria for further metabolic processing via the TCA cycle
to generate electron donors for the ETC, with O2 acting as the
ultimate electron acceptor resulting in its reduction to H2O. This
process of electron transfer generates a large H+ gradient across
the inner mitochondrial membrane, culminating in the generation of ATP through the activity of the ATP synthase (Fig. 2). As
oxidative phosphorylation is dependent on O2, its local partial
pressure (pO2) can dictate the energy production means of the
cell and thus exert influence over the metabolic state.
It is well established that hypoxia acts as a potent vasodilatory stimulus, and seminal studies have demonstrated that
arterial diameter can be bidirectionally modulated as an inverse
function of local pO2 (Jackson, 2016). However, as has been
extensively discussed elsewhere (Taggart and Wray, 1998;
Jackson, 2016), the precise molecular mechanisms through
which decreases in pO2 trigger dilations are not known. Is also
unknown whether hypoxia engages electrical signaling in the
capillary bed, but it seems possible that similar mechanisms to
those evoking arteriolar smooth muscle hyperpolarization may
have evolved in this region of the vasculature to facilitate
communication upstream to control arteriole and proximal
capillary diameter and regulate blood flow in response to local
O2 fluctuations.
In the brain, state-of-the-art measurements of pO2 have recently challenged the controversial view that hyperemiainduced increases in local pO2 are preceded by an initial dip
(Kim et al., 2000; Logothetis, 2000; Buxton, 2001; Lindauer
et al., 2001b; Vanzetta and Grinvald, 2001; Thompson et al.,
2003, 2004; Kasischke et al., 2004; Dunn et al., 2005;
Offenhauser et al., 2005; Sirotin et al., 2009; Hu and Yacoub,
2012; Ma et al., 2016; Aydin et al., 2022), which has been postulated to be driven by increased neuronal metabolism during
activity. Instead, recent data support the view that O2 tension is
initially unchanged by the initiation of neuronal activity and is
then followed by a large influx in O2 during hyperemia (Aydin
et al., 2022). Furthermore, classic positron-emission tomography
experiments have convincingly demonstrated that activityevoked increases in neuronal activity are not associated with
significant increases in O2 consumption but are accompanied by
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 12 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
increased glucose utilization—leading to the hypothesis that
aerobic glycolysis predominates as a mechanism to rapidly
supply energy during sudden increases in brain activity (Raichle
and Mintun, 2006). Accordingly, it appears unlikely that changes
in local pO2 would operate as a trigger of EMS in this organ.
However, in tissues that routinely experience local or global
periods of anaerobic work (e.g., exercising skeletal muscle), pO2
could be an important driver of EMS. Taking the example of
skeletal muscle further, the energetic demands imposed by intensive work here lead to periods in which O2 demand outstrips
supply. In addition to the immediate and rapid ATP supply
provided by the skeletal muscle phosphagen system, glycolysis
predominates during such periods due to the rate at which it can
be rapidly ramped up to produce ATP. Mitochondrial respiration
is comparatively slow as a means of energy production (Baker
et al., 2010), and the decline in intracellular pO2 imposed by the
high energetic demand imposed by intense exercise (Richardson
et al., 1995; Wagner, 2012) will reduce the ability of this system to
supply ATP to meet local needs. During such periods, decreased
intracellular pO2 may act as a direct trigger of EMS by increasing
the production or availability of feed-forward hyperpolarizing/
vasodilating molecules such as prostaglandins and NO (Jackson,
2016). However, the mechanisms for O2-dependent production
of these mediators are not clear and require further experimental attention, but it has been speculated that prostaglandin
production may involve O2-dependent oxidation and inhibition
of upstream cyclooxygenase enzymes (Jackson, 2016).
An interesting layer of pO2-mediated blood flow control can
also be envisioned for extended bouts of hypoxia, where transcriptional changes evoked by the engagement of hypoxiainducible factor (HIF-1; Majmundar et al., 2010; Yuan et al.,
2013) could serve to tune EMS elements and modulate the sensitivity of this system. HIF-1 consists of HIF-1α and HIF-1β subunits, which respond to hypoxia by modulating the expression
of >100 downstream genes (Weidemann and Johnson, 2008;
Masoud and Li, 2015). Notably, hypoxia has been associated with
HIF-1–mediated upregulation of Kir6.1/SUR2 KATP channel expression (Raeis et al., 2010). A resultant increase in functional
protein at the membrane surface could thus serve to amplify
EMS responses in the affected tissue. Moreover, HIF-mediated
increases in Kir2.1 (central to EMS signal transmission, see below)
have also been reported (Yamamura et al., 2018). Further work is
needed to survey the tissue locations and circumstances in which
drops in pO2 act to promote vasodilation and to establish the
precise molecular mechanisms through which this leads ultimately to SMC membrane hyperpolarization and vasodilation.
Exploring the full impact of hypoxia on EMS signaling pathways is
thus an intriguing avenue for experimental investigation.
An obligate byproduct of aerobic metabolic activity is CO2,
which is produced during the cyclical processing of citrate to
oxaloacetate during the TCA cycle. As a gas, CO2 diffuses from its
point source of production and is ultimately removed from the
blood. Accordingly, CO2 readily passes through the SMCs, ECs,
and pericytes of the vasculature, which may have intrinsic
mechanisms to detect local pCO2. In addition to binding to deoxygenated RBCs and being secreted via ventilation, a major
fate of CO2 is to be processed by the large family of carbonic
anhydrase metalloenzymes, which catalyze the interconversion
of CO2 and H2O to carbonic acid (H2CO3) which can, in turn,
dissociate to form bicarbonate ions (HCO3−) and protons (H+).
Normally, pCO2 in the tissue is tightly controlled at around 40
mmHg (Patel and Sharma, 2023). During an increase in oxidative metabolic activity, the increase in CO2 generated can result
in an increase in H+ concentration, decreasing pH. The cerebral
circulation is remarkably sensitive to CO2-induced acidification,
with most vessels exhibiting rapid dilation to acidosis through
multiple mechanisms detailed below and as such, hypercapnia
produces robust blood flow responses in the brain and appears
to play a major role in the process of neurovascular coupling
(Hosford et al., 2022). At the arteriolar level, a central mechanism through which this occurs is the conversion of cytosolic Ca2+
waves to Ca2+ sparks in SMCs which activate large-conductance
Ca2+ activated K+ (BK) channels to hyperpolarize the membrane
(Dabertrand et al., 2012), likely through a decrease in the open
probability of ryanodine receptors (RyRs) in the sarcoplasmic
reticulum (Wray and Burdyga, 2010). H+ ions can also decrease the activity of L-type voltage-dependent Ca2+ channels
(VDCCs; West et al., 1992), increase the generation of NO
(Lindauer et al., 2001a), and stimulate KATP channels (Wang
et al., 2003). An exception to these responses in the cerebral
circulation is the arterioles of the brainstem retrotrapezoid
nucleus, a key chemosensory region responsible for regulating ventilation in response to changes in blood pH (Cleary
et al., 2020). Here, CO2 drives a decrease in vessel diameter,
which is thought to concentrate the CO2/H+ stimulus for
chemosensing neurons, thus ensuring a more robust increase
in ventilation to clear excess CO2.
The circulation in a range of peripheral organs also exhibits
sensitivity to hypercapnia. In the coronary vasculature, stimulation of NO generation is thought to play an important role in
mediating dilation in response to increased pCO2 (Heintz et al.,
2005; Tzou et al., 2007), and similar mechanisms have been
suggested in the brachial artery (de Matthaeis et al., 2014). In the
mesenteric arteries of the intestines, hypercapnic vasodilation
has been attributed to KATP channel engagement promoting
membrane hyperpolarization (Wang et al., 2003). In skeletal
muscle, as discussed above, acidosis and increases in CO2 up to
10% cause vasodilation and elevate blood flow (Lamb et al., 1966;
Charter et al., 2018). In the kidney, which plays a central role in
acid-base balance of the blood stream, hypercapnia instead induces vasoconstrictor responses and decreases renal blood flow
through mechanisms that have not been fully clarified but appear to involve activation of the renal nerve (Norman et al., 1970;
Chapman et al., 2020). Thus, in the context of EMS CO2 likely
plays distinct tissue-dependent roles, with many organs (brain,
heart, skeletal muscle) equipped to respond to increases in CO2/
H+ and resultant acidosis by generating membrane hyperpolarization to increase blood flow.
Redox state. Reactive oxygen species (ROS) are highly reactive O2-containing molecules that are generated during oxidative phosphorylation in mitochondria through electron leak,
resulting in the reduction of molecular O2, and by NADPH oxidases in the cytosol. ROS play important physiological signaling
roles within cells and common species include superoxide anion
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 13 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
radicals (O2·
−), hydroxyl radicals (·OH), and nonradical oxidants
such as hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) and singlet oxygen (1
O2). In
addition to their roles in varied processes such as signal transduction and control of gene expression (Nose, 2000; Forman
et al., 2010; Checa and Aran, 2020), during heightened activity
ROS production can exceed the capacity of antioxidant mechanisms in the cell, allowing these molecules to build to disruptive
levels. This accumulation damages DNA and proteins and interferes with the operation of important signaling pathways
such as NO-mediated communication (Forstermann, 2010 ¨ ; Checa
and Aran, 2020). Redox homeostasis is thus a critical factor in
ensuring the continued smooth functioning of cells on a moment-to-moment basis.
Interestingly, important roles for NADPH oxidases 2 and 4
(NOX2; NOX4)—key sources of cytosolic ROS—in endothelialdependent vasodilation have been reported. In cerebral arteries,
endothelial NOX2 is associated with transient receptor potential ankyrin 1 (TRPA1) channels, which respond to NOX2-
derived ROS with Ca2+ signals that couple to EC small- and
intermediate-conductance Ca2+-activated K+ channels to produce
vasodilation (Sullivan et al., 2015). Importantly, TRPA1 channels
in capillary endothelial cells have also recently been shown to
contribute the capillary-to-arteriole electrical signaling in the
brain (Thakore et al., 2021), raising the possibility for ROSinitiated long-distance communication within the vasculature.
NOX4 has also been observed in ECs (and also appears to be
expressed by some pericytes [He et al., 2018; Vanlandewijck
et al., 2018]) and has been proposed to drive membrane hyperpolarization through the generation of H2O2 (Ray et al., 2011),
which promotes the activity of KATP and Ca2+-activated K+
channels (Bychkov et al., 1999; Matoba et al., 2000; Dantzler
et al., 2019). As H2O2 is able to readily permeate membranes, it
could also act as an intercellular indicator of redox status and as a
signaling molecule, although its brief half-life likely limits its
active range prior to decomposition (Lennicke et al., 2015; Ledo
et al., 2022). These observations support the possibility that
changes in tissue redox state brought about by increases in oxidative metabolism or membrane NADPH oxidase activity may
couple directly to electrical activity, which in the vasculature
could be translated into increases in blood flow. The resultant
incoming blood might not only provide further energy substrates
for metabolism but could also serve a homeostatic function by
delivering circulating antioxidant molecules to active tissues to
redress redox balance. Experiments involving direct measurements of ROS levels during tissue activity changes, and manipulation of their levels in conjunction with blood flow measurements
are needed to test these ideas which likely necessitates the development of new and more sensitive indicators.
The foregoing provides a non-exhaustive outline of known
and unexplored but potentially important EMS triggers. Following the triggering event, a membrane electrical signal must
next be generated that can ultimately influence blood flow.
Stage II: Chemical-to-electrical transduction and propagation
mechanisms underpin EMS
Upon detection of biochemical changes resulting from elevated
metabolic activity in a tissue, the second stage of EMS centers on
the conversion of this initiating factor into an electrical signal in
the vasculature that can propagate to reach from the initiation
site through multiple vessel branches to contractile mural cells
(Box 1). Alternatively, the process of electrical signal generation
could also occur directly in arterioles if the initiating cells are
suitably proximal, although, in general, this is likely to be secondary, simply due to the relative paucity of spatial coverage by
arterioles and the much more extensive arborization of the
capillaries that forms the bulk of the vasculature throughout all
tissues (Fig. 4). This close association with working cells thus
ideally positions capillaries as the primary sensors and responders to local activity (Gould et al., 2017).
K+ channels as signal generators. In many excitable cells,
electrical signaling takes the form of regenerative, propagating
depolarizations that characterize action potentials (e.g., cardiac
myocytes, neurons, pancreatic β cells, and gut smooth muscle)
generated by Na+- or Ca2+-permeable channels. In the vasculature, the organization of electrical signaling could be conceived
of as being “inverted,” with the dominant role played by hyperpolarizations generated through K+ channel activity. Below,
we outline studies supporting this conception of electrical signaling throughout the vasculature.
KATP channels generate signals in response to energy
deficits. Recently, we found that KATP channels take center stage
in generating electrical signals in capillaries, which are then
transmitted over long distances during EMS in the brain and
heart. In the brain, the pericytes found on the abluminal wall of
the capillaries greatly extend the sensory capabilities of the
vessels by imbuing them with the ability to directly respond to
the availability of local glucose (see Stage I, above) and likely a
broad range of other signals through their repertoire of G
protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) and ion channels (Hariharan
et al., 2020). Analysis of recent brain single-cell RNAseq data
revealed that KATP channels account for nearly half of the total
expression of all ion channel genes in these pericytes (Hariharan
et al., 2020) and acts as a reliable marker of these cells in mice
(He et al., 2018; Vanlandewijck et al., 2018). These channels are
also expressed by human pericytes (Crouch et al., 2022; Yang
et al., 2022; although note that not all studies find enrichment of
KATP genes in humans [Song et al., 2020]) and have recently
been shown to be functional in mouse brain and retinal pericytes (Sancho et al., 2022). We thus examined the role of these
channels in pericyte-mediated control of blood flow and strikingly, our studies suggest that the electrical signal resulting from
the activation of KATP channels in a single pericyte is capable of
exerting robust control of upstream capillaries covered by
contractile pericytes and arterioles and can be triggered by a fall
in local glucose availability (Hariharan et al., 2022). This KATP
channel-dependent basis for EMS extends to other tissues, with
a variant having initially been detected by us in the heart (Zhao
et al., 2020a), where KATP channels positioned in cardiac myocytes are electrically coupled to adjacent capillary ECs. Here, as
the work of cardiac myocytes increases, impacting intracellular
energy status, KATP channel open probability increases, and this
drives membrane hyperpolarization which is likely passed via a
small number of gap junctions from the cardiac myocyte to
its surrounding capillaries. From here, the signal can spread
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 14 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
throughout the vasculature to modulate blood flow (Longden
et al., 2023). Similar mechanisms may also operate in other
tissues in which KATP channels play important signaling roles
such as the pancreas or skeletal muscle. Accordingly, we posit
that KATP channels activated by a wide variety of metabolic
signals (see Stage I) operate as the central node in the EMS
signaling network generating electrical signals to influence
blood flow.
In addition to KATP channels, other K+ channels known to be
expressed throughout the vasculature might also contribute to
electrical signal generation. For example, in the arteriolar endothelium, small- and intermediate-conductance Ca2+-activated
Figure 4. EMS transmission mechanisms. (A) Comparison of the vascular volume in a 1 mm3 block of cortical tissue comprised by surface arteries, penetrating arterioles, and the capillary bed. Capillaries comprise about 85% of the vasculature by volume, with the penetrating arterioles contributing just 3%.
Thus, the capillaries are ideally positioned to act as a sensory array communicating information on tissue activity to the arterioles to regulate blood flow.
Adapted with permission from Gould et al. (2017). (B) The central image depicts an arteriole lined by arterial endothelial cells (aECs) and surrounded by smooth
muscle cells (SMCs). Downstream of this emerge capillaries, the proximal branches of which are covered in contractile pericytes. Deeper downstream branches
are covered by thin-strand pericytes. The dotted box depicts events leading to the initiation of EMS in the capillary bed, leading to the generation and
transmission of hyperpolarizing signals. In inset i (middle), a specific example is given for a decrease in glucose availability based on Hariharan et al. (2022),
which engages KATP channels. This hyperpolarization can be passed via gap junctions (GJs) into the underlying capillary endothelial cells (cECs), which may then
transmit the signal upstream via the mechanism depicted in inset ii (bottom). Here, hyperpolarization in the endothelium relieves the voltage-dependent block
of Kir2.1 channels by polyamines, leading to K+ efflux and regeneration of membrane hyperpolarization through the engagement of further Kir2.1 channels as
the signal travels upstream. Once it arrives in the proximal capillaries and arteriolar segment (inset iii, top), the electrical signal can be transmitted via gap
junctions into both the contractile pericytes and upstream SMCs, where its arrival decreases the open probability of voltage-dependent Ca2+ channels and
produces a decrease in intracellular Ca2+ which relaxes the Ca2+-sensitive contractile machinery and promotes vasodilation and an increase in blood flow.
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 15 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
K+ channels are engaged during Ca2+ elevations. The resultant
hyperpolarization can be transmitted to the underlying SMCs
via gap junction-containing myo-endothelial projections—
specialized points of contact between ECs and SMCs through the
fenestrated internal elastic lamina of these vessels. These
channels may thus also contribute to EMS as signal generators or
boosters, and further work is needed to address whether this is
the case. Yet other K+ channel isoforms in the endothelium,
pericytes, and smooth muscle (e.g., KV and BK channels in the
latter [Brayden and Nelson, 1992; Straub et al., 2009; Jackson,
2017]) could also contribute to this process. It is also possible that
some capillary conducted responses may be fully or partially
Ca2+-mediated. For example, recent work (Thakore et al., 2021)
has shown TRPA1-initiated Ca2+ signals spreading throughout
capillaries—via pannexin hemichannel release of ATP in turn
activating P2X receptors on endothelial cells—at ∼35 µm/s, ultimately activating SK and IK channels which then generate
electrical signals for the upstream arteriole.
Kir2.1 channels mediate signal propagation through the
vasculature. Once a hyperpolarizing electrical signal has been
generated in response to metabolic activity, it must be
transmitted—in some cases over long distances—to reach upstream capillaries and arterioles covered with contractile cells
(Box 1) to drive their relaxation. In the brain, we initially
characterized this process in capillary ECs, which express the
strong-inward rectifier K+ (Kir2.1) channel (Longden and Nelson,
2015; Longden et al., 2017; Harraz et al., 2018a; Moshkforoush
et al., 2020). This channel responds directly to both increases in
external K+ and, importantly, hyperpolarization (Longden and
Nelson, 2015). These stimuli can relieve the voltage-dependent
block of Kir2.1 channels by the positively charged intracellular
polyamines (such as spermine and putrescine) and Mg2+ that
produce their characteristic inwardly rectifying current–voltage
relationship. The blocking process here likely results from a
combination of charge screening through the interaction of
polyamines with key residues in the channels’ inner vestibule
outlined above, lowering the K+ permeation rate, along with
direct pore occlusion at more depolarized potentials (Xie et al.,
2002). The process of blockade relief by K+ elevation and/or an
initial hyperpolarization can generate a feed-forward effect
that—if it overcomes the background depolarizing conductances
of the cell (Tsoukias et al., 2007)—can rapidly drive the membrane potential to close to the K+ equilibrium potential (EK)
through K+ efflux (Longden and Nelson, 2015). These properties
of Kir2.1 and its expression throughout the capillary endothelium form the basis for a minimal regenerative electrical signaling system that allows for the long-range transmission of
hyperpolarizations. Conceptually, injection of sufficient current
into an endothelial cell at any point in a capillary network could
be passed via gap junctions (likely composed of connexins 43 and
45; He et al., 2018; Vanlandewijck et al., 2018; Hariharan et al.,
2020) into adjacent endothelial cells where it can regenerate
itself through the unblocking of resident Kir2.1 channels in the
next cell. In principle, this process can generate electrical signals
that can traverse long vascular distances to reach the upstream
supplying arteriole to drive (Fig. 4). Evidence for such a capillary-to-arteriole signaling system has now been provided by a
number of studies in both brain and heart (Longden et al., 2017,
2023; Zhao et al., 2020a; Hariharan et al., 2022), and similar
findings have emerged in skeletal muscle (Lamb et al., 2018).
Moreover, studies in arterioles have provided evidence for longrange conduction at this level of the vascular bed (Emerson and
Segal, 2001), and these electrical signals can be readily transferred from ECs to SMCs (Yamamoto et al., 1999; Sonkusare
et al., 2016). It is likely that similar mechanisms operate in
other tissues and further studies are needed to address this
possibility.
The heart is distinct from the brain in that direct current
injection from the cardiac myocyte through a sparse set of gap
junctions could provide a low-pass filtered current source for
hyperpolarizing or depolarizing changes in capillary voltage.
Direct measurements of voltage are needed in all cell types, and
implementing novel imaging tools such as genetically encoded
voltage indicators to enable these measurements is therefore
essential.
Together, the K+ channels that act as signal generators for
EMS—primarily KATP channels—pass signals on to the Kir2.1
channels that mediate distance transmission of electrical signals
through the vascular network to enable the precise delivery of
blood to the tissue in the third and final stage of this process.
Stage III: Hyperpolarizing electrical signaling adjusts blood flow as
the homeostatic output of EMS
After its transmission through the capillary network, an electrical signal will arrive at vascular branches covered with contractile cells—either contractile pericytes in the proximal
branches of the capillary bed or SMCs covering arterioles and
arteries. The mechanisms governing contractile pericyte contraction and relaxation have not been elucidated in detail, but
given their expression of α-SMA (Box 1) and the presence of
functional VDCCs (Gonzales et al., 2020), these are likely to be
relatively similar to those of upstream SMCs, which we focus on
here (although it is noteworthy that differences in the ion
channel complement and relative expression of several proteins
have been reported between these two cell types which likely
contribute to functional differences [Gonzales et al., 2020;
Ratelade et al., 2020]).
In SMCs, the interplay between membrane potential and
intracellular Ca2+ is critically important. An electrical signal
arriving at the arteriolar endothelium can be readily transferred to the smooth muscle via gap junction-containing
myoendothelial projections, as noted above. This handover of
hyperpolarization in turn will close L-type voltage-gated Ca2+
channels (VGCCs) embedded in the sarcolemma, which in turn
decreases global intracellular Ca2+. In SMCs, global Ca2+ levels
are sensed by calmodulin, which influences the activity of myosin light chain kinase, which transfers phosphates from ATP to
the myosin head group to enable its interaction with actin fibers
in the process of actin–myosin crossbridge cycling. Accordingly,
a fall in Ca2+ in the SMC resulting from VGCC closure will interrupt this process, leading to a relaxation of the contractile
machinery. This process playing out through many cells along
the length of the vessel in response to a vasodilatory stimulus
leads to dilation of the arteriole and an increase in blood flow.
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 16 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
The magnitude and reach of an arriving electrical signal will
determine the resolution of the blood flow response. Here, the
steep relationship between membrane potential and SMC tone
will dictate the size of the resultant diameter change. In pressurized cerebral arteries, SMC membrane potential is roughly
−40 mV under resting conditions (Knot and Nelson, 1998),
which closely aligns also with the resting potentials of capillary
endothelial cells and pericytes (Hariharan et al., 2022; Sancho
et al., 2022). At −60 mV, these arteries are almost maximally
dilated, and thus arriving signals with a magnitude within this
20-mV range produce a nearly linear effect on vessel diameter
which exponentially amplifies blood flow as a product of the
fourth power of the vessel radius, as described by the HagenPoiseuille equation. This voltage–diameter relationship is well
supported in cerebral arteries and has also been explored in
detail in arteries from hamster cheek pouch and intestine (Xia
and Duling, 1998) and skeletal muscle (Wolfle et al., 2011 ¨ ). Indeed, in the latter, vessels are maximally constricted at approximately −35 mV and maximally dilated at approximately
−50 mV, further illustrating the incredibly sensitive relationship
between vessel diameter and membrane voltage (Kotecha and
Hill, 2005). It will be important to fully elucidate these relationships for arterioles controlling blood flow to capillary beds in
each tissue of interest, as differences in expression and environment may influence their range, linearity, and steepness
which consequently shapes the hemodynamic response.
If a signal is transmitted from capillaries in a metabolically
active area to a feed arteriole that has multiple capillary offshoots along its length, the bulk increase in blood flow through
the artery in response to its dilation could be expected to be
distributed throughout all capillaries emanating from this vessel
(Fig. 5). In contrast, if a signal reaches only the contractile
pericyte-covered capillary nearest to its point of origin (i.e.,
reaches the proximal capillaries but not the arteriole itself),
the blood flow increase resulting from the dilating capillary
would be expected to be much smaller and more localized, being
a product of the dilating capillary diverting blood away from
other areas of the network by modifying the path-of-least-resistance for flow (and absent a global increase in blood flow
elicited by dilating the feed arteriole). Thus, the resolution of the
blood delivery through the capillary network (i.e., the number of
branches experiencing hyperemia) is predicted to be a function
of the reach (i.e., length constant) and magnitude of electrical
signals, assuming no changes in other ongoing processes (Fig. 5).
However, the α-SMA-expressing precapillary sphincters found
at the point of transition from arteriole to capillary in multiple
capillary beds including those of the brain (He et al., 2010; Grubb
et al., 2020), heart (Anderson and Anderson, 1980), and skeletal
muscle (Rhodin, 1967) also likely play an important role in
controlling hyperemic resolution at this level of the vascular tree
through moment-to-moment modification of their contractile
state. An electrical signal arriving from a capillary tree in an
active area of tissue is expected to open the gateway sphincter as
it passes into the arteriole, while other sphincters controlling
flow to other non-electrically active capillary networks fed by
the same arteriole remain closed. This would accordingly promote a preferential distribution of blood to the capillaries in the
active region downstream of the relaxing sphincter. As long as
the sphincters controlling the access of blood to other capillary
offshoots remain constricted at the same time, this should amplify blood flow to the electrically active capillaries while minimizing the perturbation of flow through capillaries in areas that
are not currently generating EMS signals. There are likely even
more mechanisms for modifying flow pathways through the
capillaries. For example, signals inducing slow or tonic constrictions of thin-strand pericytes (Fernandez-Klett et al., 2010 ´ ;
Hartmann et al., 2021) may selectively narrow certain vessels to
alter the path of least resistance through the capillary bed over
longer time scales. Furthermore, data indicating that contractile
pericytes located at branch points can independently regulate
perfusion through the daughter branches they cover suggest
that the regulation of blood distribution is highly complex and
controlled at multiple levels (Gonzales et al., 2020). Fully
studying all such possibilities will be necessary to arrive at a
model that captures the complexity of the regulation of blood
flow through capillary networks. It is also interesting to consider
that electrical signals arriving at the venous side of the vasculature could be an important component of EMS. Detailed
information on the flow of electrical signals through threedimensional vascular networks in combination with dynamic
tissue activity, vessel diameter, and blood flow measurements is
thus a critically important development that is needed to fully
understand exactly how these blood delivery issues are handled
across tissues and under varying metabolic loads.
The shape of the blood flow response will be influenced thus
by the length constant of an electrical signal, and also its magnitude and duration. In vivo, the duration of arriving electrical
signals will likely differ depending on the tissue, the type of
activity for which blood is being supplied, and the specific molecular setup of the local vasculature, among other factors.
Broadly, electrical signaling could operate in either analog or
digital modes. In the brain, present data suggest that the electrical signaling component of EMS in response to local activity
most closely resembles a digital electrical signal (Fig. 4), which
propagates in a regenerative fashion through the vasculature to
drive upstream dilation and increase blood flow. These signals
have rapid on- and off-kinetics and their duration is tied closely
to the length of the stimulus. This digital signal analogy is supported by data indicating an all-or-none property of electrical
signaling through brain capillaries, in that stimuli below K+
concentrations of 7 mM are ineffective in changing arteriole
diameter, whereas K+ concentrations above this concentration
evoke near-maximal dilation of the upstream arteriole (Longden
et al., 2017). This behavior can be explained from the perspective
of the Kir channel by introducing a bistable membrane potential
with points of stability at EK when channels are fully active
and the resting membrane potential when they are closed
(Moshkforoush et al., 2020). Similarly, the transfer of signals
along lengths of arterial tissue has been studied in detail, and
this work reveals the conduction of electrical signals along the
endothelium which is largely sustained at distances of up to
2 mm, suggesting an active regeneration mechanism (Emerson
and Segal, 2000, 2001), which is readily transferred laterally to
the smooth muscle (Yamamoto et al., 1999).
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 17 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
Figure 5. Electrical signal length constants and resolution of blood flow control. Concepts are depicted for brain vasculature. Similar principles likely
apply in other organs, modified by specific angioarchitectural features and molecular configurations. (A) Brain vasculature. Top: Top-down view showing
overlapping pial (surface) arterial and veinous networks. Bottom: Side-view showing a pial artery transitioning to a penetrating arteriole as it dives into the
brain and gives way to the capillary network. Left inset: Neurovascular unit at the initial capillaries surrounded by contractile pericytes. Right inset:
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 18 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
In other tissues and in other tissue activity scenarios, a form
of analog signaling could predominate. From a biophysical perspective, such signaling would be by its nature non-regenerative
and non-propagative and could instead be organized around the
electrotonic conduction of potentials according to the cable
properties of the local vessels. Possible molecular configurations
that would enable such a signal would be a capillary bed that
receives electrical input via gap junctions from either parenchymal cells or overlying pericytes acting as signal generators,
while at the same time lacking a high density of Kir channels in
the ECs. Without a regenerative mechanism to amplify and
propagate the signal, a voltage change would instead exponentially decay as a function of vessel distance, the degree of
membrane leak, and the size of other “background” conductances. EMS operating in this mode would thus give rise to
signals that are a more direct function of the amplitude and
duration of the initiating metabolic stimulus and would as a
result likely operate over slower and more local time scales and
shape the blood flow response accordingly (Fig. 5).
The incoming blood that results from these dilations initiated
by EMS performs multiple homeostatic functions. In addition to
the delivery of energy substrates and O2, CO2, lactate, and other
waste products generated during metabolic activity are removed
(Fig. 1), and in the process pH and temperature of the tissue may
be regulated also. Accordingly, the increase in metabolic activity
in the tissue is compensated for and deviations in intracellular
energy state (i.e., changes in ATP:ADP ratio) are reversed, effectively matching energy demand to supply and ensuring continued
optimal function of the tissue.
Taken together, the three stages of the EMS hypothesis outlined above provide a mechanistic framework enabling the accurate and timely coupling of energy supply through blood flow
to local metabolic needs in highly active tissues. We postulate
that EMS variants operate in all tissues with high energy consumption (e.g., brain, heart, kidney, skeletal muscle) and likely
also in other areas and that this precise matching helps to ensure
the health and function of local cells on a moment-to-moment
basis across long periods of time.
EMS uncoupling as a mediator of aging
We posit that EMS plays a key role in matching the energetic
demands of varied physiological processes with precise moment-to-moment energy substrate delivery via the blood. It thus
follows that processes that disrupt EMS would be detrimental to
overall tissue function, stemming from an inability to meet
ongoing energetic demands. Aging is one such process that could
degrade EMS and is characterized by a panoply of functional
changes that result in overall organismal decline. A number of
hallmarks of the aging process have been defined and these
include genomic instability, telomere attrition, epigenetic alterations, loss of proteostasis, disabled macroautophagy, deregulation of nutrient sensing, mitochondrial dysfunction, cellular
senescence, stem cell exhaustion, inflammation, dysbiosis, and
alterations to intercellular communication (López-Ot´ın et al.,
2023).
It is possible that age-related alterations to intercellular signaling (for example, due to the loss of cardiac and vascular KATP
channel function that has been documented in older animals
[Yang et al., 2016]) could be a proximate cause that deranges the
metabolic sensing or signal transmission aspects of EMS, which
would then be expected to contribute further to the aging process. It is not difficult to conceive that the reduced substrate
delivery emanating from impaired blood flow regulation due to
loss of EMS could then play into mitochondrial dysfunction and
thus exert an outsized impact on cellular energy status. Indeed,
many of the aging hallmarks outlined above depend on precise
control of energy generation and delivery. For example, altered
substrate availability will affect the activity of the mechanistic
target of the rapamycin (MTOR) complex which modulates the
activity of a range of transcription factors influencing the expression of elements that contribute to a huge number of core
cellular activities, including protein synthesis and proteasome
activity, autophagy, and metabolism (López-Ot´ın et al., 2023).
Accordingly, it seems feasible that age-related declines in EMS
could play a key role in aging through knock-on effects on
mechanisms that are at the heart of the aging process. By preventing EMS degradation over long time spans—for example
through the development of gerotherapies that preserve EMS
sensing, transduction, and propagation mechanisms—it may be
possible to preserve overall tissue and organ function and
slow aging.
EMS uncoupling as a driver of organ failure states
Our hypothesis places EMS at the center of blood flow modulation mechanisms in a range of tissues. Extending from the
foregoing, it follows that disease process-related breakdown of
EMS mechanisms could be an initiating factor in the mismatch
between energy supply and demand which then precipitates
metabolic failure states that compromise organ function and
lead to further pathology.
Organ function is intricately intertwined with metabolism,
and thus pathologies that disrupt metabolic function have wideranging and frequently disastrous effects. Metabolic syndrome
is highly prevalent, and in the US is estimated to affect ∼35% of
Neurovascular unit of the deep capillary bed with thin strand pericytes. EC, endothelial cell; GJ, gap junction; PSJ, peg-socket junction; RBC, red blood cell.
(B) Diameter–voltage relationship for a pial artery showing that maximal working range is controlled across ∼30 mV of membrane potential. Adapted with
permission from Knot and Nelson (1998). (C) Regenerative and passive signal transmission modes. Top: Theoretical signal transmission–distance relationships
for regenerative and passive signals. Regenerative mechanisms will conduct over greater lengths of vessel due to the signal being actively renewed. Bottom:
Graphical depiction of regenerative versus passive transmission modes. (D) The length constant of transmission, dictated by input amplitude and the electrical
properties of the local vasculature, will determine the resolution of blood flow control. Top: Activation of large areas of tissue will initiate large signals in the
vasculature that conduct over longer distances and induce more contractile cells to relax and produce a low-resolution blood flow increase that encompasses
many cells. Middle: Smaller metabolically active fields will evoke electrical signals with a shorter length constant, recruiting fewer vessels and evoking more
localized blood flow increases that perfuse a smaller tissue volume. Bottom: The smallest active regions may evoke a higher resolution blood flow increase still.
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 19 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
the population (Hirode and Wong, 2020). It consists of a group
of conditions that encompasses obesity, hypertension, and dyslipidemia among others which greatly increase the risk of developing diabetes, heart disease, and stroke, and is overall linked
to early death (Eckel et al., 2010). A major factor that promotes
the development of metabolic syndrome is a high-fat diet, and
interestingly, this has been associated with the impairment of a
wide range of elements that comprise the EMS mechanisms we
have identified. Specifically, a high-fat diet has been shown to
impair vascular KATP channel function (Fan et al., 2008, 2009)
and endothelial Kir2.1 function (Fancher et al., 2020; Ahn et al.,
2022), the two key EMS elements involved in the transduction of
metabolic signals to changes in membrane electrical activity and
transmission of electrical signals throughout the vasculature,
respectively. Moreover, vascular smooth muscle undergoes a
range of changes in obesity including an increase in the density
of voltage-gated Ca2+ channels which enhances contraction
(Owen et al., 2013), along with a decrease in BK channel function
(Borbouse et al., 2009), promoting hypertension and a decrease
in blood flow.
Such changes would be expected to weaken EMS by reducing
the ability to generate substantial electrical signals, while also
diminishing their propagation throughout the vasculature.
Weaker signals arriving at the arteriolar level would also encounter a higher basal contractile state, resulting from a higher
level of intracellular Ca2+ at a given membrane potential. This is
predicted to further limit the ability of the arriving hyperpolarization to drive a significant decrease in the level of intracellular Ca2+ to drive dilations and increase blood flow to
metabolically active regions. Accordingly, functional disruption
of EMS could be an early event that compounds issues locally
within the affected tissue driven by insufficient energy substrate delivery. Exploration of these possibilities will reveal the
extent of the contribution of EMS disruption to a range of pathologies in organs throughout the body.
The pancreas plays a central role in energy balance by controlling blood glucose levels through insulin secretion. As blood
glucose levels rise (e.g., postprandially) insulin secretion increases, which promotes glucose utilization, uptake, and storage.
Efficient microvascular function and tight control of blood flow
are accordingly essential to pancreatic function, and impairment
of pericyte and capillary signaling as well as structural microvascular abnormalities are early events in the pathogenesis of
diabetes. As such, the loss of blood flow control in pancreatic
islets could be a key event that impacts nutrient sensing, hormone release, and the timely control of glycemic status (Almaça
et al, 2018; Gonçalves et al, 2023). The resulting derangements in
insulin signaling and blood glucose levels in turn will have a
range of further effects that could compromise efficient energy
matching to local metabolic demands and contribute to multiorgan functional decline.
Heart failure is associated with metabolic changes that lead to
loss of efficient energy generation that contributes to profound
impairment of cardiac output. Accordingly, blood flow is disrupted throughout the body, further compounding any existing
energetic issues and creating novel problems associated with a
lack of proper substrate delivery. Due to these far-reaching
ramifications, heart failure is perceived as a complex, multiorgan syndrome with metabolic failure as the central driving
force (Rosano and Vitale, 2018). Under normal circumstances,
the heart predominantly oxidizes free fatty acids but also uses
glucose to produce the ATP needed for optimal function. In heart
failure, insulin resistance is thought to limit glucose utilization
and favor the use of free fatty acids for ketogenesis. This leads to
a reduction in the production of ATP in the heart, which in turn
contributes to a decline in the efficiency of cardiac output. This
is interwoven with other abnormal processes such as structural
changes and an increase in oxidative stress (Rosano and Vitale,
2018). After the onset of cardiac failure, activation of the sympathetic nervous system and renin–angiotensin system may also
trigger an increase in cytokines, angiotensin II, and free fatty
acids. The latter damages the pancreas, impairing insulin regulation of blood glucose and disrupting glucose handling by
skeletal muscle. The elevated angiotensin II can also drive
vasoconstriction—further impairing blood delivery—and hampered endothelial function has been noted in this context
(Ashrafian et al., 2007; Giannitsi et al., 2019). Activation of the
angiotensin AT1 receptor also produces ROS in the vessel wall
which could contribute to signaling processes under normal
conditions but may disrupt components of local EMS mechanisms when out of balance with antioxidants (Nickenig and
Harrison, 2002). Against this backdrop, impairment of EMS
may contribute to disturbed metabolic activity in the heart and
therefore the reduction of cardiac output and its downstream
effects. For example, disruption of KATP-mediated electrical
signaling from cardiac myocytes to ECs (Zhao et al., 2020a)
would be predicted to impair the tight matching of blood flow to
energy demand and therefore contribute to cardiac dysfunction.
Further work is needed to explore this possibility and the potential disruption of other aspects of EMS in the context of heart
disease.
Disruption of cerebral blood flow is thought to be one of the
earliest factors on the path to dementia, in some cases being
detectable decades before the onset of cognitive decline (IturriaMedina et al., 2016). This has been suggested as a watershed
moment that leads to a range of compounding consequences that
ultimately lead to neuronal dysfunction, death, and cognitive
decline. Indeed, it has been postulated that once a critical
threshold of cerebral hypoperfusion has been crossed, a panoply
of cellular issues ensue throughout the neurovascular unit
stemming from this disrupted energy balance (de la Torre,
2000a). These include the degeneration of pericytes (Sagare
et al., 2013; Halliday et al., 2016) and profound alterations to
endothelial (Wang et al., 2018) and smooth muscle cells
(Chabriat et al., 2009), leading, in turn, to further hemodynamic
impairments, increased generation of free radicals by starved
mitochondria, damage of cellular macromolecules, loss of control over membrane potential and ionic imbalance due to Na+/K+
ATPase dysfunction, derangements in Ca2+ handling, impacts on
gene expression, and impaired protein production, posttranslational modification, and trafficking (de la Torre, 2000b). Together, these mounting problems initially cause neuronal
dysfunction and lead ultimately to the death of the cell. As EMS
provides an essential link matching blood flow to neuronal
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 20 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
metabolic needs, subtle functional disturbances in this process
could divorce capillary electrical signaling from local metabolism and thus lead to mismatching between neuronal energy
supply and demand, driving the advancement of the cascade of
issues outlined above. Importantly, such disruptions could be
initiated in the brain capillaries themselves or could arise as the
result of dysfunction in other organs (e.g., pancreas and heart)
leading to inefficiencies in energy substrate supply that disrupt
brain metabolism. Studies taking an integrated multiorgan view
of the cascading effects that result from blood flow impairment
throughout the body are thus essential to explore the impacts of
energy substrate delivery impairment on integrated physiological functioning.
Outstanding questions and future directions
Our recent studies have revealed overlapping yet distinct EMS
mechanisms that operate in both the brain (Hariharan et al.,
2022; Longden et al., 2023) and heart (Zhao et al., 2020a;
Longden et al., 2023). Work in these systems offers a platform to
deepen our understanding EMS in these and other organs, and
here we outline the key outstanding questions at the present
juncture and the technological developments that will be necessary to gain a full understanding of this system and its contributions to health and disease.
Key questions to unlock a deeper understanding of EMS
What is the full range of organ systems that utilize EMS to
match blood flow to cellular metabolic demands? As noted above,
our work has revealed EMS mechanisms in the brain and heart,
but other organs with high energy demands remain unexplored.
Of particular note, the kidneys rank alongside the heart as the
joint-top organs with the highest resting energy expenditure
(Wang et al., 2010). The brain consumes around half as much
ATP “at rest,” followed closely by the liver, with skeletal muscle
and adipose tissue trailing these and accounting for only a small
fraction of basal metabolic rate. Of course, both individual brain
regions and skeletal muscles engage in dramatic changes in their
activity levels (i.e., when engaging in computations or contractions, respectively). Accordingly, it is important to investigate in detail the different types of EMS mechanisms operating
in these tissues and beyond, where variations and modifications
may provide insight into local metabolic regulation. For example, it is possible that EMS is absent in a tissue like the liver,
which maintains a large store of glycogen to draw upon to meet
its energy needs when glucose levels in the blood are low (Rui,
2014). In the kidney, the glomerular filtration rate is homeostatically controlled and is influenced by blood flow, increases in
which drive filtration, greater reabsorption, and increased
metabolic demands. Investigating whether other EMS mechanisms are at play in the kidney at the capillary and arteriolar
levels may yield further useful insights. By extension, surveying
the operation of EMS and its, similarities, differences, and
ramifications throughout all organs are important avenues for
future work.
What is the full range of metabolic triggers of EMS? Current
data suggest important roles for intracellular energy state
(i.e., ATP:ADP ratio) resulting from increased work and
decreased local energy substrate availability as triggering factors
in EMS. Moving forward, it will be important to determine the
full range of factors produced in response to metabolic deviations in eliciting electrical signaling through the vasculature and
their detailed mechanisms. For example, investigating the relationship between lactate and capillary electrical signaling is an
important and tractable set of experiments that is within easy
reach. Measurements of O2 tension in vivo are more difficult but
have been made possible by the development of elegant phosphorescent lifetime imaging approaches (Sakadzic et al., 2010 ´ ).
Improvements in the time resolution of these measurements
and their wider application will offer deeper insights into the
relationship between local O2 fluctuations and blood flow. Given
the huge complexity of biochemical pathways, the number of
potential factors that could engage EMS is vast, and mechanisms
could be tailored to elicit electrical responses from metabolic
processes that produce a wide array of metabolites and byproducts. Efforts to understand the breadth of these metabolic
signaling mechanisms and the specific mechanisms through
which they produce electrical signaling in the vasculature will
thus reveal insights into EMS in a range of contexts.
What is the full range of mechanisms that convert metabolic
load to blood flow elevations at the arteriolar and capillary
levels? Here, we have considered EMS mechanisms primarily
from the standpoint of propagated hyperpolarizations from
capillaries to arterioles. As discussed above, different mechanisms underlying these signals may be tailored to suit the particular blood flow needs of a given tissue. For example, the
kidney requires constant blood flow to enable optimal filtration,
and thus feedback mechanisms to maintain blood flow at a homeostatic set-point may dominate in this organ. In contrast,
heart, brain, and skeletal muscle all exhibit rapid changes in
activity and metabolism across various spatiotemporal domains
and thus the EMS mechanisms that have evolved are likely to be
specialized to meet their individual blood flow requirements.
Although in general arteriole coverage is sparser than the
reach of the capillary bed, it will be important alongside work in
capillaries to understand the EMS mechanisms operating directly in arterioles at the levels of the arteriolar endothelium and
in SMCs, which may have unique mechanisms to sense local
metabolic changes.
How does EMS breakdown contribute to aging and disease? Given
the suspected widespread nature of EMS signaling, the potential
for contribution to aging and to a range of disease processes is
extensive. Aging is characterized by a general decline in function during adulthood. Given the essential need of all organ
systems to match metabolic needs with energy delivery through
tightly controlled blood flow, it is possible that disruption of
EMS makes a key contribution to the aging process. Here, a
decline in the efficiency of EMS mechanisms could lead to a
gradually widening gap between energy demand and delivery,
which in turn is expected to influence essentially all aspects of
cellular health. Extending this to disease processes, contexts for
EMS disruption that are of particular interest are disorders involving a metabolic component such as diabetes, metabolic
syndrome, Alzheimer’s disease, and vascular dementia, and
also rarer inherited metabolic diseases such as Niemann-Pick
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 21 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
disease, Tay-Sachs disease, or porphyria. Accordingly, understanding how EMS contributes to both aging and disease and
finding ways to restore or boost flagging EMS mechanisms may
help to extend the health span of aging individuals and may offer
novel approaches to treat diseases of metabolism that impact a
wide range of organ systems.
Technological developments to enable breakthroughs in
understanding EMS
To enable deeper insight into the organization and operation of
EMS mechanisms described above, key technological developments
are needed that will expand sensing capabilities and augment the
resolution of imaging approaches. Together, these will allow us to
measure EMS in increasingly complex and holistic scenarios.
Development of approaches to directly visualize EMS in tissue
volumes. At present, multiphoton imaging methods are best
suited to imaging hemodynamics and EMS processes occurring
deep within tissues. However, several technical hurdles make
visualization of EMS processes challenging. In particular, standard multiphoton systems are typically restricted to time-lapse
imaging of single planes at video rate using resonant and galvanometer scanning mirrors to guide rapid laser rastering or
acquisition of small volumes at a few hertz using piezoelectric
objective drives. To be able to fully understand EMS, advances
enabling video rate imaging of electrical signaling in large tissue
volumes are required, thus capturing the dynamics occurring
in highly convoluted vascular networks. A number of recent
technical achievements in multiphoton imaging make it feasible
to overcome these issues in the near future. In particular, the
development of FACED microscopy and its extension to blood
flow imaging enables kilohertz imaging of single planes and
megahertz imaging of single lines. These approaches are fast
enough to capture the dynamics of even the fastest moving RBCs
moving through the largest arteries and enable for the first time
the precise measurement of blood flow (i.e., RBC flux and velocity) without the need to completely collapse the spatial dimension to a single line. The application of Bessel-focused beams
has enabled the rapid imaging of considerably larger volumes
than were previously accessible (Fan et al., 2020a), and the
development of SCAPE imaging has also enabled high-speed
dynamic volumetric imaging in vivo (Bouchard et al., 2015;
Voleti et al., 2019). The widespread adoption of these exciting
techniques will enable a more detailed understanding of the
vascular dynamics of various organ systems, and the volume of
data these approaches generate will necessarily spur the development of further automated techniques for analysis.
Accompanying these hardware developments is the need to
develop novel models to enable direct visualization of the EMS
process. Thus, the generation of mouse lines that express stateof-the-art voltage sensors such as ASAP (Evans et al., 2023) or
opto-patch (Fan et al., 2020b) variants in pericytes, ECs, and
SMCs to enable direct visualization of electrical signaling occurring throughout the vasculature of an organism are essential.
These approaches can be combined with other mouse lines and
viral transfection approaches to enable the visualization of local
activity, metabolic processes, and measurements in the vasculature (Zhao et al., 2020b) throughout tissues of interest.
Approaches to visualize the activity of energy substrate availability and metabolic pathway activity in real time. Until recently,
few options have existed to visualize metabolic processes directly, and available techniques required combined measurements from many cells to obtain low temporal resolution
readouts. However, in recent years advances in probe development now promise great insights into metabolic imaging in vivo,
in real time, and with single-cell resolution. Indeed, a range of
recently developed substrate, metabolite, and energy status
sensors are poised to enable visualization of cell metabolism in
unprecedented detail. For example, the recently developed glucose sensor, green glifon (Mita et al., 2019), has an excellent
spatiotemporal resolution, allowing the real-time measurement
of glucose uptake in single cells. Combination of this with viral
vectors that allow for specific expression in cells of interest will
enable real-time monitoring of glucose availability and uptake
during various scenarios (e.g., brain region activation or increased heart contraction). Alongside this glucose sensor, fluorescent protein-based probes for lactate and pyruvate have also
been developed (Harada et al., 2020), and thus their deployment
in various cell types should allow the visualization of glycolytic
flux and the flow of lactate produced during metabolism. The
development of phosphorescent probes with lifetimes that are
sensitive to the local concentration of O2 is also now enabling the
visualization of vessel and tissue oxygenation. These studies are
updating traditional models of O2 diffusion into the tissue such
as the Krogh cylinder by providing novel insights into the dynamics of O2 consumption in working tissue. Improvements in
the spatiotemporal resolution of these imaging techniques and
their deployment in in vivo studies throughout the body will add
layers of detail to our understanding of O2 delivery and utilization (Sakadzic et al., 2010 ´ ; Parpaleix et al., 2013; Lyons et al.,
2016; Aydin et al., 2022).
Operating at the opposite end of the spectrum of substrate
consumption is PercevalHR, a probe for intracellular energy
status. This allows real-time measurement of ATP:ADP ratio and
has been deployed in neurons during activation with glucose,
KCl, or electrical stimulation and provides excellent resolution
revealing how these stimuli alter the ratio of high energy molecules within the cell (Tantama et al., 2013). Notably, several of
these probes are two-photon compatible and so should be deployable in vivo to allow the observation of how these different
aspects of metabolism intersect with one another in a systems
context. Ongoing developments in the field of redox biology,
such as the development of the novel redox probe FROG/B
(Sugiura et al., 2020), also promise to overcome the limitations
of current probes which makes their direct application and interpretation in vivo challenging. Further work to produce
imaging tools with superior signal-to-noise ratio and tailored
subcellular localization in organelles will undoubtedly yield
deeper insights into this exciting area for further development.
Visualization of the nanoscale organization of EMS complexes. A
further priority is determining the specific molecular organization of the signaling components that enable EMS in different
cell types and systems. Considering KATP channels as the central
node of currently known EMS pathways, further work is needed
to establish the specific membrane localization of these channels
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 22 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
in different cells and to elucidate the specific macromolecular
signaling complexes that they occupy. In brain pericytes, for
example, important questions to answer in the near future are
whether the KATP channels are primarily found in the cell body
or in thin-strand processes, or whether they are evenly distributed throughout the plasma membrane. Insights into the
molecular partners with which these channels most closely associate, be that the enzymes of the glycolytic machinery (DharChowdhury et al., 2005), PKA, and A-kinase anchoring proteins
(Hayabuchi et al., 2001), or as yet undetermined signaling
partners, will help in the determination of the precise intracellular mechanisms through which these channels are engaged.
An appealing possibility in this context is that the KATP channel
could occupy a macromolecular signaling complex positioned in
or very close to peg-socket junctions between pericytes and
endothelial cells (Ornelas et al., 2021), permitting the immediate transfer of charge generated by KATP channels into the
underlying endothelium for optimal electrical signaling upstream to arterioles. Further technical developments are
needed to probe EMS at this level of detail, but answering
nanoscale questions will offer insight that likely will be essential for understanding how EMS falters in aging and disease and will be needed for finding potential solutions to
rectifying such issues.
Summary and conclusions
In summary, we outline a hypothesis for EMS as a generalized
blood flow control mechanism operating across tissues with a
wide range of spatiotemporal energy needs. Specifically, EMS
can be initiated by a range of metabolic changes, including those
of substrate availability, altered intracellular energy status, and
byproducts of metabolism. Through the activity of K+ channels
and KATP channels in particular, metabolic cues are converted
into electrical signals in the vasculature which are then conducted along the capillary and arteriolar endothelium to produce
relaxation of upstream SMCs and contractile pericytes and increase blood flow to areas of metabolic need. It is possible that
disruption of EMS in aging and in disease states with metabolic
and vascular components is a key event that leads to a mismatch
between energy supply and demand and participates actively
in the development of cellular dysfunction and nominally irreversible tissue damage. Accordingly, targeting EMS for the
development of novel therapeutics may provide the means to
protect blood flow and energy delivery to tissues, thereby
counteracting the metabolic deficits that arise during aging
(Amorim et al., 2022), and helping to restore energy balance
in diseases ranging from Alzheimer’s and dementia to diabetes, metabolic syndrome, heart failure, and chronic kidney
disease.
As such, research aimed at fully elucidating the physiological
mechanisms of EMS and visualizing its contributions to blood
flow control in complex three-dimensional time-resolved networks is essential. Equally important are investigations of mechanisms by which the EMS may be damaged during aging and
disease. Likewise, therapeutic repair or restoration of damaged
EMS components to ameliorate or fix this damage may provide
partial or complete repair in diverse degenerative diseases.
Acknowledgments
David A. Eisner served as editor.
Support for this work was provided to T.A. Longden by the
National Institutes of Health National Institutes on Aging
(1R01AG066645) and Neurological Disorders and Stroke,
(5R01NS115401, and 1DP2NS121347) and by the American Heart
Association (19IPLOI34660108) and to. W.J. Lederer by the National Institutes of Heart, Lung and Blood (R01 HL142290), Allergy and Infectious Diseases (U19 AI090959), General Medical
Sciences (GM140822), and by special funds from BioMET at the
University of Maryland School of Medicine.
Author contributions: All authors reviewed the manuscript
and approved its submission.
Disclosures: The authors declare no competing interests exist.
Submitted: 26 July 2023
Revised: 27 October 2023
Accepted: 14 December 2023
References
Abd El-Rahman, R.R., O.F. Harraz, S.E. Brett, Y. Anfinogenova, R.E. Mufti, D.
Goldman, and D.G. Welsh. 2013. Identification of L- and T-type Ca2+
channels in rat cerebral arteries: Role in myogenic tone development.
Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol. 304:H58–H71. https://doi.org/10.1152/
ajpheart.00476.2012
Aguilar-Bryan, L., and J. Bryan. 1999. Molecular biology of adenosine
triphosphate-sensitive potassium channels. Endocr. Rev. 20:101–135.
https://doi.org/10.1210/edrv.20.2.0361
Ahn, S.J., I.S. Fancher, J.T. Bian, C.X. Zhang, S. Schwab, R. Gaffin, S.A. Phillips, and I. Levitan. 2017. Inwardly rectifying K+ channels are major
contributors to flow-induced vasodilatation in resistance arteries.
J. Physiol. 595:2339–2364. https://doi.org/10.1113/JP273255
Ahn, S.J., E. Le Master, J.C. Lee, S.A. Phillips, I. Levitan, and I.S. Fancher.
2022. Differential effects of obesity on visceral versus subcutaneous
adipose arteries: Role of shear-activated Kir2.1 and alterations to the
glycocalyx. Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol. 322:H156–H166. https://doi
.org/10.1152/ajpheart.00399.2021
Airan, R.D., K.R. Thompson, L.E. Fenno, H. Bernstein, and K. Deisseroth.
2009. Temporally precise in vivo control of intracellular signalling.
Nature. 458:1025–1029. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature07926
Alarcon-Martinez, L., S. Yilmaz-Ozcan, M. Yemisci, J. Schallek, K. Kılıç, A.
Can, A. Di Polo, and T. Dalkara. 2018. Capillary pericytes express
α-smooth muscle actin, which requires prevention of filamentous-actin
depolymerization for detection. Elife. 7:e34861. https://doi.org/10.7554/
eLife.34861
Allen, P.S., G.O. Matheson, G. Zhu, D. Gheorgiu, R.S. Dunlop, T. Falconer, C.
Stanley, and P.W. Hochachka. 1997. Simultaneous 31P MRS of the soleus
and gastrocnemius in Sherpas during graded calf muscle exercise. Am.
J. Physiol. 273:R999–R1007. https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpregu.1997.273.3.R999
Almaça, J., J. Weitz, R. Rodriguez-Diaz, E. Pereira, and A. Caicedo. 2018. The
pericyte of the pancreatic islet regulates capillary diameter and local
blood flow. Cell Metab. 27:630–644.e4. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cmet
.2018.02.016
Alsahli, M., and J.E. Gerich. 2017. Renal glucose metabolism in normal
physiological conditions and in diabetes. Diabetes Res. Clin. Pract. 133:
1–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.diabres.2017.07.033
Amorim, J.A., G. Coppotelli, A.P. Rolo, C.M. Palmeira, J.M. Ross, and D.A.
Sinclair. 2022. Mitochondrial and metabolic dysfunction in ageing and
age-related diseases. Nat. Rev. Endocrinol. 18:243–258. https://doi.org/10
.1038/s41574-021-00626-7
Anderson, B.G., and W.D. Anderson. 1980. Microvasculature of the canine
heart demonstrated by scanning electron microscopy. Am. J. Anat. 158:
217–227. https://doi.org/10.1002/aja.1001580210
Arnold, P.K., and L.W.S. Finley. 2023. Regulation and function of the mammalian tricarboxylic acid cycle. J. Biol. Chem. 299:102838. https://doi
.org/10.1016/j.jbc.2022.102838
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 23 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
Ashrafian, H., M.P. Frenneaux, and L.H. Opie. 2007. Metabolic mechanisms
in heart failure. Circulation. 116:434–448. https://doi.org/10.1161/
CIRCULATIONAHA.107.702795
Aydin, A.-K., C. Verdier, E. Chaigneau, and S. Charpak. 2022. The oxygen
initial dip in the brain of anesthetized and awake mice. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. USA. 119:e2200205119. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2200205119
Aziz, Q., Y. Li, N. Anderson, L. Ojake, E. Tsisanova, and A. Tinker. 2017.
Molecular and functional characterization of the endothelial ATPsensitive potassium channel. J. Biol. Chem. 292:17587–17597. https://doi
.org/10.1074/jbc.M117.810325
Babenko, A.P., and J. Bryan. 2003. Sur domains that associate with and gate
KATP pores define a novel gatekeeper. J. Biol. Chem. 278:41577–41580.
https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.C300363200
Bagher, P., T. Beleznai, Y. Kansui, R. Mitchell, C.J. Garland, and K.A. Dora.
2012. Low intravascular pressure activates endothelial cell TRPV4
channels, local Ca2+ events, and IKCa channels, reducing arteriolar tone.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 109:18174–18179. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas
.1211946109
Baker, J.S., M.C. McCormick, and R.A. Robergs. 2010. Interaction among
skeletal muscle metabolic energy systems during intense exercise.
J. Nutr. Metab. 2010:905612. https://doi.org/10.1155/2010/905612
Balaban, R.S., H.L. Kantor, L.A. Katz, and R.W. Briggs. 1986. Relation between
work and phosphate metabolite in the in vivo paced mammalian heart.
Science. 232:1121–1123. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.3704638
Ballanyi, K. 2004. Protective role of neuronal KATP channels in brain hypoxia. J. Exp. Biol. 207:3201–3212. https://doi.org/10.1242/jeb.01106
Ballanyi, K., J. Doutheil, and J. Brockhaus. 1996. Membrane potentials and
microenvironment of rat dorsal vagal cells in vitro during energy depletion. J. Physiol. 495:769–784. https://doi.org/10.1113/jphysiol.1996
.sp021632
Baukrowitz, T., U. Schulte, D. Oliver, S. Herlitze, T. Krauter, S.J. Tucker, J.P.
Ruppersberg, and B. Fakler. 1998. PIP2 and PIP as determinants for ATP
inhibition of KATP channels. Science. 282:1141–1144. https://doi.org/10
.1126/science.282.5391.1141
Beach, J.M., E.D. McGahren, and B.R. Duling. 1998. Capillaries and arterioles
are electrically coupled in hamster cheek pouch. Am. J. Physiol. 275:
H1489–H1496. https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpheart.1998.275.4.H1489
Beech, D.J., H. Zhang, K. Nakao, and T.B. Bolton. 1993. K channel activation by
nucleotide diphosphates and its inhibition by glibenclamide in vascular
smooth muscle cells. Br. J. Pharmacol. 110:573–582. https://doi.org/10
.1111/j.1476-5381.1993.tb13849.x
Berthiaume, A.A., R.I. Grant, K.P. McDowell, R.G. Underly, D.A. Hartmann,
M. Levy, N.R. Bhat, and A.Y. Shih. 2018. Dynamic remodeling of pericytes in vivo maintains capillary coverage in the adult mouse brain. Cell
Rep. 22:8–16. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2017.12.016
Bhargava, P., and R.G. Schnellmann. 2017. Mitochondrial energetics in the
kidney. Nat. Rev. Nephrol. 13:629–646. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrneph
.2017.107
Blinder, P., P.S. Tsai, J.P. Kaufhold, P.M. Knutsen, H. Suhl, and D. Kleinfeld.
2013. The cortical angiome: An interconnected vascular network with
noncolumnar patterns of blood flow. Nat. Neurosci. 16:889–897. https://
doi.org/10.1038/nn.3426
Bonev, A.D., and M.T. Nelson. 1996. Vasoconstrictors inhibit ATP-sensitive K+
channels in arterial smooth muscle through protein kinase C. J. Gen.
Physiol. 108:315–323. https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.108.4.315
Bonora, M., S. Patergnani, A. Rimessi, E. De Marchi, J.M. Suski, A. Bononi, C.
Giorgi, S. Marchi, S. Missiroli, F. Poletti, et al. 2012. ATP synthesis and
storage. Purinergic Signal. 8:343–357. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11302-012
-9305-8
Borbouse, L., G.M. Dick, S. Asano, S.B. Bender, U.D. Dincer, G.A. Payne, Z.P.
Neeb, I.N. Bratz, M. Sturek, and J.D. Tune. 2009. Impaired function of
coronary BK(Ca) channels in metabolic syndrome. Am. J. Physiol. Heart
Circ. Physiol. 297:H1629–H1637. https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpheart.00466
.2009
Bouchard, M.B., V. Voleti, C.S. Mendes, C. Lacefield, W.B. Grueber, R.S.
Mann, R.M. Bruno, and E.M.C. Hillman. 2015. Swept confocally-aligned
planar excitation (SCAPE) microscopy for high speed volumetric
imaging of behaving organisms. Nat. Photonics. 9:113–119. https://doi
.org/10.1038/nphoton.2014.323
Brayden, J.E., and M.T. Nelson. 1992. Regulation of arterial tone by activation
of calcium-dependent potassium channels. Science. 256:532–535. https://
doi.org/10.1126/science.1373909
Buttgereit, F., and M.D. Brand. 1995. A hierarchy of ATP-consuming processes in mammalian cells. Biochem. J. 312:163–167. https://doi.org/10
.1042/bj3120163
Buxton, R.B. 2001. The elusive initial dip. Neuroimage. 13:953–958. https://doi
.org/10.1006/nimg.2001.0814
Bychkov, R., K. Pieper, C. Ried, M. Milosheva, E. Bychkov, F.C. Luft, and H.
Haller. 1999. Hydrogen peroxide, potassium currents, and membrane
potential in human endothelial cells. Circulation. 99:1719–1725. https://
doi.org/10.1161/01.CIR.99.13.1719
Chabriat, H., A. Joutel, M. Dichgans, E. Tournier-Lasserve, and M.-G. Bousser.
2009. Cadasil. Lancet Neurol. 8:643–653. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1474
-4422(09)70127-9
Chai, Y., and Y.-F. Lin. 2010. Stimulation of neuronal KATP channels by
cGMP-dependent protein kinase: Involvement of ROS and 5-hydroxydecanoate-sensitive factors in signal transduction. Am. J. Physiol. Cell
Physiol. 298:C875–C892. https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpcell.00196.2009
Chai, Y., D.-M. Zhang, and Y.-F. Lin. 2011. Activation of cGMP-dependent
protein kinase stimulates cardiac ATP-sensitive potassium channels
via a ROS/calmodulin/CaMKII signaling cascade. PLoS One. 6:e18191.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0018191
Chapman, C.L., Z.J. Schlader, E.L. Reed, M.L. Worley, and B.D. Johnson. 2020.
Renal and segmental artery hemodynamic response to acute, mild hypercapnia. Am. J. Physiol. Regul. Integr. Comp. Physiol. 318:R822–R827.
https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpregu.00035.2020
Charter, M.E., I.R. Lamb, and C.L. Murrant. 2018. Arteriolar and capillary
responses to CO2 and H+ in hamster skeletal muscle microvasculature:
Implications for active hyperemia. Microcirculation. 25:e12494. https://
doi.org/10.1111/micc.12494
Checa, J., and J.M. Aran. 2020. Reactive oxygen species: Drivers of physiological and pathological processes. J. Inflamm. Res. 13:1057–1073. https://
doi.org/10.2147/JIR.S275595
Cheng, Y. 2015. Single-particle cryo-EM at crystallographic resolution. Cell.
161:450–457. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2015.03.049
Cheng, Y., N. Grigorieff, P.A. Penczek, and T. Walz. 2015. A primer to singleparticle cryo-electron microscopy. Cell. 161:438–449. https://doi.org/10
.1016/j.cell.2015.03.050
Choi, I.Y., and R. Gruetter. 2003. In vivo 13C NMR assessment of brain glycogen concentration and turnover in the awake rat. Neurochem. Int. 43:
317–322. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0197-0186(03)00018-4
Chuquet, J., P. Quilichini, E.A. Nimchinsky, and G. Buzsaki. 2010. Predomi- ´
nant enhancement of glucose uptake in astrocytes versus neurons
during activation of the somatosensory cortex. J. Neurosci. 30:
15298–15303. https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0762-10.2010
Chutkow, W.A., J.C. Makielski, D.J. Nelson, C.F. Burant, and Z. Fan. 1999.
Alternative splicing of sur2 Exon 17 regulates nucleotide sensitivity of
the ATP-sensitive potassium channel. J. Biol. Chem. 274:13656–13665.
https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.274.19.13656
Cleary, C.M., T.S. Moreira, A.C. Takakura, M.T. Nelson, T.A. Longden, and
D.K. Mulkey. 2020. Vascular control of the CO2/H+-dependent drive to
breathe. Elife. 9:e59499. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.59499
Clement, J.P. IV, K. Kunjilwar, G. Gonzalez, M. Schwanstecher, U. Panten, L.
Aguilar-Bryan, and J. Bryan. 1997. Association and stoichiometry of
K(ATP) channel subunits. Neuron. 18:827–838. https://doi.org/10.1016/
S0896-6273(00)80321-9
Conti, L.R., C.M. Radeke, and C.A. Vandenberg. 2002. Membrane targeting of
ATP-sensitive potassium channel. Effects of glycosylation on surface
expression. J. Biol. Chem. 277:25416–25422. https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc
.M203109200
Cook, D.L., and C.N. Hales. 1984. Intracellular ATP directly blocks K+ channels
in pancreatic B-cells. Nature. 311:271–273. https://doi.org/10.1038/
311271a0
Crouch, E.E., A. Bhaduri, M.G. Andrews, A. Cebrian-Silla, L.N. Diafos, J.O.
Birrueta, K. Wedderburn-Pugh, E.J. Valenzuela, N.K. Bennett, U.C. Eze,
et al. 2022. Ensembles of endothelial and mural cells promote angiogenesis in prenatal human brain. Cell. 185:3753–3769.e18. https://doi
.org/10.1016/j.cell.2022.09.004
Dabertrand, F., M.T. Nelson, and J.E. Brayden. 2012. Acidosis dilates brain
parenchymal arterioles by conversion of calcium waves to sparks to
activate BK channels. Circ. Res. 110:285–294. https://doi.org/10.1161/
CIRCRESAHA.111.258145
Dabertrand, F., R.M. Hannah, J.M. Pearson, D.C. Hill-Eubanks, J.E. Brayden,
and M.T. Nelson. 2013. Prostaglandin E2, a postulated astrocyte-derived
neurovascular coupling agent, constricts rather than dilates parenchymal arterioles. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 33:479–482. https://doi
.org/10.1038/jcbfm.2013.9
Dantzler, H.A., M.P. Matott, D. Martinez, and D.D. Kline. 2019. Hydrogen
peroxide inhibits neurons in the paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus via potassium channel activation. Am. J. Physiol. Regul. Integr.
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 24 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
Comp. Physiol. 317:R121–R133. https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpregu.00054
.2019
Daut, J., N.B. Standen, and M.T. Nelson. 1994. The role of the membrane
potential of endothelial and smooth muscle cells in the regulation of
coronary blood flow. J. Cardiovasc. Electrophysiol. 5:154–181. https://doi
.org/10.1111/j.1540-8167.1994.tb01156.x
Davies, L.M., G.I. Purves, R. Barrett-Jolley, and C. Dart. 2010. Interaction with
caveolin-1 modulates vascular ATP-sensitive potassium (KATP) channel
activity. J. Physiol. 588:3255–3266. https://doi.org/10.1113/jphysiol.2010
.194779
de la Torre, J.C. 2000a. Cerebral hypoperfusion, capillary degeneration, and
development of Alzheimer disease. Alzheimer Dis. Assoc. Disord. 14:
S72–S81. https://doi.org/10.1097/00002093-200000001-00012
de la Torre, J.C. 2000b. Critically attained threshold of cerebral hypoperfusion: Can it cause Alzheimer’s disease? Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 903:
424–436. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1749-6632.2000.tb06394.x
de Matthaeis, A., A. Greco, M.P. Dagostino, G. Paroni, A. Fontana, M. Vinciguerra, G. Mazzoccoli, D. Seripa, and G. Vendemiale. 2014. Effects of
hypercapnia on peripheral vascular reactivity in elderly patients with
acute exacerbation of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Clin. Interv. Aging. 9:871–878. https://doi.org/10.2147/CIA.S57548
Deng, D., C. Xu, P. Sun, J. Wu, C. Yan, M. Hu, and N. Yan. 2014. Crystal
structure of the human glucose transporter GLUT1. Nature. 510:121–125.
https://doi.org/10.1038/nature13306
Dhar-Chowdhury, P., M.D. Harrell, S.Y. Han, D. Jankowska, L. Parachuru, A.
Morrissey, S. Srivastava, W. Liu, B. Malester, H. Yoshida, and W.A.
Coetzee. 2005. The glycolytic enzymes, glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate
dehydrogenase, triose-phosphate isomerase, and pyruvate kinase are
components of the K(ATP) channel macromolecular complex and regulate its function. J. Biol. Chem. 280:38464–38470. https://doi.org/10
.1074/jbc.M508744200
Dienel, G.A. 2012. Brain lactate metabolism: The discoveries and the controversies. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 32:1107–1138. https://doi.org/10
.1038/jcbfm.2011.175
DiNuzzo, M. 2019. How glycogen sustains brain function: A plausible allosteric signaling pathway mediated by glucose phosphates. J. Cereb. Blood
Flow Metab. 39:1452–1459. https://doi.org/10.1177/0271678X19856713
Dora, K.A., M.P. Doyle, and B.R. Duling. 1997. Elevation of intracellular calcium in smooth muscle causes endothelial cell generation of NO in
arterioles. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 94:6529–6534. https://doi.org/10
.1073/pnas.94.12.6529
Dora, K.A., J. Xia, and B.R. Duling. 2003. Endothelial cell signaling during
conducted vasomotor responses. Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol. 285:
H119–H126. https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpheart.00643.2002
Dubinsky, W.P., O. Mayorga-Wark, and S.G. Schultz. 1998. Colocalization of
glycolytic enzyme activity and KATP channels in basolateral membrane
of Necturus enterocytes. Am. J. Physiol. 275:C1653–C1659. https://doi
.org/10.1152/ajpcell.1998.275.6.C1653
Duncker, D.J., and R.J. Bache. 2008. Regulation of coronary blood flow during
exercise. Physiol. Rev. 88:1009–1086. https://doi.org/10.1152/physrev
.00045.2006
Dunn, A.K., A. Devor, A.M. Dale, and D.A. Boas. 2005. Spatial extent of
oxygen metabolism and hemodynamic changes during functional activation of the rat somatosensory cortex. Neuroimage. 27:279–290.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2005.04.024
Earley, S., and J.E. Brayden. 2015. Transient receptor potential channels in
the vasculature. Physiol. Rev. 95:645–690. https://doi.org/10.1152/
physrev.00026.2014
Eckel, R.H., K.G. Alberti, S.M. Grundy, and P.Z. Zimmet. 2010. The metabolic
syndrome. Lancet. 375:181–183. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(09)
61794-3
Edwards, G., K.A. Dora, M.J. Gardener, C.J. Garland, and A.H. Weston. 1998.
K+ is an endothelium-derived hyperpolarizing factor in rat arteries.
Nature. 396:269–272. https://doi.org/10.1038/24388
Emerson, G.G., and S.S. Segal. 2000. Endothelial cell pathway for conduction
of hyperpolarization and vasodilation along hamster feed artery. Circ.
Res. 86:94–100. https://doi.org/10.1161/01.RES.86.1.94
Emerson, G.G., and S.S. Segal. 2001. Electrical activation of endothelium
evokes vasodilation and hyperpolarization along hamster feed arteries.
Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol. 280:H160–H167. https://doi.org/10
.1152/ajpheart.2001.280.1.H160
Evans, S.W., D.-Q. Shi, M. Chavarha, M.H. Plitt, J. Taxidis, B. Madruga, J.L. Fan,
F.-J. Hwang, S.C. van Keulen, C.-M. Suomivuori, et al. 2023. A positively
tuned voltage indicator for extended electrical recordings in the brain.Nat.
Methods. 20:1104–1113. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-023-01913-z
Fan, L.-H., H.-Y. Tian, A.-Q. Ma, Z. Hu, J.-H. Huo, and Y.-X. Cao. 2008. Altered ATP-sensitive potassium channels may underscore obesitytriggered increase in blood pressure. Acta Pharmacol. Sin. 29:1167–1174.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1745-7254.2008.00810.x
Fan, L.-H., H.-Y. Tian, M.-L. Yang, A.-Q. Ma, Z. Hu, X.-J. Bai, and Y.-X. Cao.
2009. High-fat diet may impair K(ATP) channels in vascular smooth
muscle cells. Biomed. Pharmacother. 63:165–170. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.biopha.2008.01.005
Fan, J.L., J.A. Rivera, W. Sun, J. Peterson, H. Haeberle, S. Rubin, and N. Ji.
2020a. High-speed volumetric two-photon fluorescence imaging of
neurovascular dynamics. Nat. Commun. 11:6020. https://doi.org/10
.1038/s41467-020-19851-1
Fan, L.Z., S. Kheifets, U.L. Bohm, H. Wu, K.D. Piatkevich, M.E. Xie, V. Parot, ¨
Y. Ha, K.E. Evans, E.S. Boyden, et al. 2020b. All-Optical electrophysiology reveals the role of lateral inhibition in sensory processing in
cortical layer 1. Cell. 180:521–535.e18. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2020
.01.001
Fancher, I.S., E. Le Master, S.J. Ahn, C. Adamos, J.C. Lee, E. Berdyshev, R.O.
Dull, S.A. Phillips, and I. Levitan. 2020. Impairment of flow-sensitive
inwardly rectifying K+ channels via disruption of glycocalyx mediates
obesity-induced endothelial dysfunction. Arterioscler. Thromb. Vasc. Biol.
40:e240–e255. https://doi.org/10.1161/ATVBAHA.120.314935
Fernandes, C.A.H., D. Zuniga, C. Fagnen, V. Kugler, R. Scala, G. Pehau-Ar- ´
naudet, R. Wagner, D. Perahia, S. Bendahhou, and C. Venien-Bryan. ´
2022. Cryo-electron microscopy unveils unique structural features of
the human Kir2.1 channel. Sci. Adv. 8:eabq8489. https://doi.org/10.1126/
sciadv.abq8489
Fernandez-Klett, F., N. Offenhauser, U. Dirnagl, J. Priller, and U. Lindauer. ´
2010. Pericytes in capillaries are contractile in vivo, but arterioles
mediate functional hyperemia in the mouse brain. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA. 107:22290–22295. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1011321108
Figueroa, X.F., and B.R. Duling. 2009. Gap junctions in the control of vascular
function. Antioxid. Redox Signal. 11:251–266. https://doi.org/10.1089/ars
.2008.2117
Forman, H.J., M. Maiorino, and F. Ursini. 2010. Signaling functions of reactive oxygen species. Biochemistry. 49:835–842. https://doi.org/10.1021/
bi9020378
Forstermann, U. 2010. Nitric oxide and oxidative stress in vascular disease. ¨
Pflugers Arch. 459:923–939. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00424-010-0808-2
Foster, M.N., and W.A. Coetzee. 2016. KATP channels in the cardiovascular
system. Physiol. Rev. 96:177–252. https://doi.org/10.1152/physrev.00003
.2015
Fujita, A., and Y. Kurachi. 2000. Molecular aspects of ATP-sensitive K+
channels in the cardiovascular system and K+ channel openers. Pharmacol. Ther. 85:39–53. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0163-7258(99)00050-9
Garland, C.J., P. Bagher, C. Powell, X. Ye, H.A.L. Lemmey, L. Borysova, and
K.A. Dora. 2017. Voltage-dependent Ca2+ entry into smooth muscle
during contraction promotes endothelium-mediated feedback vasodilation in arterioles. Sci. Signal. 10:eaal3806. https://doi.org/10.1126/
scisignal.aal3806
Garthwaite, J. 2019. NO as a multimodal transmitter in the brain: Discovery
and current status. Br. J. Pharmacol. 176:197–211. https://doi.org/10.1111/
bph.14532
Giannitsi, S., M. Bougiakli, A. Bechlioulis, and K. Naka. 2019. Endothelial
dysfunction and heart failure: A review of the existing bibliography
with emphasis on flow mediated dilation. JRSM Cardiovasc. Dis. 8:
2048004019843047. https://doi.org/10.1177/2048004019843047
Gold, P.E., and D.L. Korol. 2012. Making memories matter. Front. Integr.
Neurosci. 6:116. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnint.2012.00116
Goldberg, I.J., C.M. Trent, and P.C. Schulze. 2012. Lipid metabolism and
toxicity in the heart. Cell Metab. 15:805–812. https://doi.org/10.1016/j
.cmet.2012.04.006
Gonçalves, L.M., M.M. Fahd Qadir, M. Boulina, M. Makhmutova, E. Pereira,
and J. Almaça. 2023. Pericyte dysfunction and impaired vasomotion are
hallmarks of islets during the pathogenesis of type 1 diabetes. Cell Reports. 42:112913. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2023.112913
Gonzales, A.L., Y. Yang, M.N. Sullivan, L. Sanders, F. Dabertrand, D.C. HillEubanks, M.T. Nelson, and S. Earley. 2014. A PLCγ1-dependent, forcesensitive signaling network in the myogenic constriction of cerebral
arteries. Sci. Signal. 7:ra49. https://doi.org/10.1126/scisignal.2004732
Gonzales, A.L., N.R. Klug, A. Moshkforoush, J.C. Lee, F.K. Lee, B. Shui, N.M.
Tsoukias, M.I. Kotlikoff, D. Hill-Eubanks, and M.T. Nelson. 2020.
Contractile pericytes determine the direction of blood flow at capillary
junctions. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 117:27022–27033. https://doi.org/10
.1073/pnas.1922755117
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 25 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
Gordon, G.R.J., H.B. Choi, R.L. Rungta, G.C.R. Ellis-Davies, and B.A. MacVicar.
2008. Brain metabolism dictates the polarity of astrocyte control over
arterioles. Nature. 456:745–749. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature07525
Gould, I.G., P. Tsai, D. Kleinfeld, and A. Linninger. 2017. The capillary bed
offers the largest hemodynamic resistance to the cortical blood
supply. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 37:52–68. https://doi.org/10.1177/
0271678X16671146
Grant, R.I., D.A. Hartmann, R.G. Underly, A.-A. Berthiaume, N.R. Bhat, and
A.Y. Shih. 2019. Organizational hierarchy and structural diversity of
microvascular pericytes in adult mouse cortex. J. Cereb. Blood Flow
Metab. 39:411–425. https://doi.org/10.1177/0271678X17732229
Greiner, J.V., and T. Glonek. 2021. Intracellular ATP concentration and implication for cellular evolution. Biology. 10:1166. https://doi.org/10
.3390/biology10111166
Gribble, F.M., G. Loussouarn, S.J. Tucker, C. Zhao, C.G. Nichols, and F.M.
Ashcroft. 2000. A novel method for measurement of submembrane
ATP concentration. J. Biol. Chem. 275:30046–30049. https://doi.org/10
.1074/jbc.M001010200
Grubb, S., C. Cai, B.O. Hald, L. Khennouf, R.P. Murmu, A.G.K. Jensen, J.
Fordsmann, S. Zambach, and M. Lauritzen. 2020. Precapillary sphincters maintain perfusion in the cerebral cortex. Nat. Commun. 11:395.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-020-14330-z
Haas, T.L., and B.R. Duling. 1997. Morphology favors an endothelial cell
pathway for longitudinal conduction within arterioles. Microvasc. Res.
53:113–120. https://doi.org/10.1006/mvre.1996.1999
Hald, B.O., and D.G. Welsh. 2020. Conceptualizing conduction as a pliant
electrical response: Impact of gap junctions and ion channels. Am.
J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol. 319:H1276–H1289. https://doi.org/10.1152/
ajpheart.00285.2020
Hall, C.N., C. Reynell, B. Gesslein, N.B. Hamilton, A. Mishra, B.A. Sutherland,
F.M. O’Farrell, A.M. Buchan, M. Lauritzen, and D. Attwell. 2014. Capillary pericytes regulate cerebral blood flow in health and disease.
Nature. 508:55–60. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature13165
Halliday, M.R., S.V. Rege, Q. Ma, Z. Zhao, C.A. Miller, E.A. Winkler, and B.V.
Zlokovic. 2016. Accelerated pericyte degeneration and blood-brain
barrier breakdown in apolipoprotein E4 carriers with Alzheimer’s
disease. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 36:216–227. https://doi.org/10.1038/
jcbfm.2015.44
Han, J., I. So, E.Y. Kim, and Y.E. Earm. 1993. ATP-sensitive potassium
channels are modulated by intracellular lactate in rabbit ventricular
myocytes. Pflugers Arch. 425:546–548. https://doi.org/10.1007/
BF00374883
Han, J., N. Kim, E. Kim, W.-K. Ho, and Y.E. Earm. 2001. Modulation of ATPsensitive potassium channels by cGMP-dependent protein kinase in
rabbit ventricular myocytes. J. Biol. Chem. 276:22140–22147. https://doi
.org/10.1074/jbc.M010103200
Hannah, R.M., K.M. Dunn, A.D. Bonev, and M.T. Nelson. 2011. Endothelial
SK(Ca) and IK(Ca) channels regulate brain parenchymal arteriolar diameter and cortical cerebral blood flow. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 31:
1175–1186. https://doi.org/10.1038/jcbfm.2010.214
Harada, K., T. Chihara, Y. Hayasaka, M. Mita, M. Takizawa, K. Ishida, M.
Arai, S. Tsuno, M. Matsumoto, T. Ishihara, et al. 2020. Green fluorescent protein-based lactate and pyruvate indicators suitable for biochemical assays and live cell imaging. Sci. Rep. 10:19562. https://doi.org/
10.1038/s41598-020-76440-4
Hariharan, A., N. Weir, C. Robertson, L. He, C. Betsholtz, and T.A. Longden.
2020. The ion channel and GPCR toolkit of brain capillary pericytes.
Front. Cell. Neurosci. 14:601324. https://doi.org/10.3389/fncel.2020
.601324
Hariharan, A., C.D. Robertson, D.C.G. Garcia, and T.A. Longden. 2022. Brain
capillary pericytes are metabolic sentinels that control blood flow
through a KATP channel-dependent energy switch. Cell Rep. 41:111872.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2022.111872
Harraz, O.F., R.R. Abd El-Rahman, K. Bigdely-Shamloo, S.M. Wilson, S.E.
Brett, M. Romero, A.L. Gonzales, S. Earley, E.J. Vigmond, A. Nygren,
et al. 2014. Ca(V)3.2 channels and the induction of negative feedback in
cerebral arteries. Circ. Res. 115:650–661. https://doi.org/10.1161/
CIRCRESAHA.114.304056
Harraz, O.F., T.A. Longden, F. Dabertrand, D. Hill-Eubanks, and M.T. Nelson.
2018a. Endothelial GqPCR activity controls capillary electrical signaling
and brain blood flow through PIP2 depletion. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA.
115:E3569–E3577. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1800201115
Harraz, O.F., T.A. Longden, D. Hill-Eubanks, and M.T. Nelson. 2018b. PIP2
depletion promotes TRPV4 channel activity in mouse brain capillary
endothelial cells. Elife. 7:e38689. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.38689
Harraz, O.F., D. Hill-Eubanks, and M.T. Nelson. 2020. PIP2: A critical regulator of vascular ion channels hiding in plain sight. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA. 117:20378–20389. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2006737117
Harraz, O.F., N.R. Klug, A.J. Senatore, D.C. Hill-Eubanks, and M.T. Nelson. 2022. Piezo1 is a mechanosensor channel in central nervous
system capillaries. Circ. Res. 130:1531–1546. https://doi.org/10.1161/
CIRCRESAHA.122.320827
Hartmann, D.A., A.-A. Berthiaume, R.I. Grant, S.A. Harrill, T. Koski, T. Tieu,
K.P. McDowell, A.V. Faino, A.L. Kelly, and A.Y. Shih. 2021. Brain capillary pericytes exert a substantial but slow influence on blood flow.
Nat. Neurosci. 24:633–645. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41593-020-00793-2
Harvey, W. 1957. Movement of the Heart and Blood in Animals. Blackwell
Scientific, Oxford, UK.
Hayabuchi, Y., C. Dart, and N.B. Standen. 2001. Evidence for involvement of
A-kinase anchoring protein in activation of rat arterial K(ATP) channels
by protein kinase A. J. Physiol. 536:421–427. https://doi.org/10.1111/j
.1469-7793.2001.0421c.xd
He, Y.Y., S.J. Yu, Y. Cui, and P. Du. 2010. Morphological study on microvasculature of left ventricular wall in infant and adult yaks. Anat. Rec.
293:1519–1526. https://doi.org/10.1002/ar.21201
He, L., M. Vanlandewijck, M.A. Mae, J. Andrae, K. Ando, F. Del Gaudio, K. ¨
Nahar, T. Lebouvier, B. Laviña, L. Gouveia, et al. 2018. Single-cell RNA
sequencing of mouse brain and lung vascular and vessel-associated cell
types. Sci. Data. 5:180160. https://doi.org/10.1038/sdata.2018.160
Hein, T.W., W. Xu, and L. Kuo. 2006. Dilation of retinal arterioles in response
to lactate: Role of nitric oxide, guanylyl cyclase, and ATP-sensitive
potassium channels. Invest. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 47:693–699. https://
doi.org/10.1167/iovs.05-1224
Heintz, A., T. Koch, and A. Deussen. 2005. Intact nitric oxide production is
obligatory for the sustained flow response during hypercapnic acidosis
in guinea pig heart. Cardiovasc. Res. 66:55–63. https://doi.org/10.1016/j
.cardiores.2004.12.001
Hellsten, Y., D. Maclean, G. Radegran, B. Saltin, and J. Bangsbo. 1998. Ade- ˚
nosine concentrations in the interstitium of resting and contracting
human skeletal muscle. Circulation. 98:6–8. https://doi.org/10.1161/01
.CIR.98.1.6
Heppner, T.J., A.D. Bonev, L.F. Santana, and M.T. Nelson. 2002. Alkaline pH
shifts Ca2+ sparks to Ca2+ waves in smooth muscle cells of pressurized
cerebral arteries. Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol. 283:H2169–H2176.
https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpheart.00603.2002
Hibino, H., A. Inanobe, K. Furutani, S. Murakami, I. Findlay, and Y. Kurachi.
2010. Inwardly rectifying potassium channels: Their structure, function, and physiological roles. Physiol. Rev. 90:291–366. https://doi.org/10
.1152/physrev.00021.2009
Hilgemann, D.W., and R. Ball. 1996. Regulation of cardiac Na+,Ca2+ exchange
and KATP potassium channels by PIP2. Science. 273:956–959. https://doi
.org/10.1126/science.273.5277.956
Hill, R.A., L. Tong, P. Yuan, S. Murikinati, S. Gupta, and J. Grutzendler. 2015.
Regional blood flow in the normal and ischemic brain is controlled by
arteriolar smooth muscle cell contractility and not by capillary pericytes. Neuron. 87:95–110. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2015.06.001
Hille, B., E.J. Dickson, M. Kruse, O. Vivas, and B.-C. Suh. 2015. Phosphoinositides regulate ion channels. Biochim. Biophys. Acta. 1851:844–856.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbalip.2014.09.010
Hirode, G., and R.J. Wong. 2020. Trends in the prevalence of metabolic
syndrome in the United States, 2011–2016. JAMA. 323:2526–2528.
https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2020.4501
Ho, T., E. Potapenko, D.B. Davis, and M.J. Merrins. 2023. A plasma
membrane-associated glycolytic metabolon is functionally coupled to
KATP channels in pancreatic α and β cells from humans and mice. Cell
Rep. 42:112394. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2023.112394
Hong, M., E. Kefaloyianni, L. Bao, B. Malester, D. Delaroche, T.A. Neubert,
and W.A. Coetzee. 2011. Cardiac ATP-sensitive K+ channel associates
with the glycolytic enzyme complex. FASEB J. 25:2456–2467. https://doi
.org/10.1096/fj.10-176669
Hori, M., and M. Kitakaze. 1991. Adenosine, the heart, and coronary circulation. Hypertension. 18:565–574. https://doi.org/10.1161/01.HYP.18.5
.565
Horie, M., H. Irisawa, and A. Noma. 1987. Voltage-dependent magnesium
block of adenosine-triphosphate-sensitive potassium channel in
guinea-pig ventricular cells. J. Physiol. 387:251–272. https://doi.org/10
.1113/jphysiol.1987.sp016572
Hosford, P.S., J.A. Wells, S. Nizari, I.N. Christie, S.M. Theparambil, P.A.
Castro, A. Hadjihambi, L.F. Barros, I. Ruminot, M.F. Lythgoe, and A.V.
Gourine. 2022. CO2 signaling mediates neurovascular coupling in the
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 26 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
cerebral cortex. Nat. Commun. 13:2125. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467
-022-29622-9
Hu, Y., and G.S. Wilson. 1997a. Rapid changes in local extracellular rat brain
glucose observed with an in vivo glucose sensor. J. Neurochem. 68:
1745–1752. https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1471-4159.1997.68041745.x
Hu, Y., and G.S. Wilson. 1997b. A temporary local energy pool coupled to
neuronal activity: Fluctuations of extracellular lactate levels in rat brain
monitored with rapid-response enzyme-based sensor. J. Neurochem. 69:
1484–1490. https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1471-4159.1997.69041484.x
Hu, X., and E. Yacoub. 2012. The story of the initial dip in fMRI. Neuroimage.
62:1103–1108. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012.03.005
Huang, Y., D. Hu, C. Huang, and C.G. Nichols. 2019. Genetic discovery of ATPsensitive K+ channels in cardiovascular diseases. Circ. Arrhythm. Electrophysiol. 12:e007322. https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCEP.119.007322
Inagaki, N., T. Gonoi, J.P. Clement IV, N. Namba, J. Inazawa, G. Gonzalez, L.
Aguilar-Bryan, S. Seino, and J. Bryan. 1995. Reconstitution of IKATP: An
inward rectifier subunit plus the sulfonylurea receptor. Science. 270:
1166–1170. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.270.5239.1166
Inagaki, N., T. Gonoi, and S. Seino. 1997. Subunit stoichiometry of the pancreatic β-cell ATP-sensitive K+ channel. FEBS Lett. 409:232–236. https://
doi.org/10.1016/S0014-5793(97)00488-2
Iturria-Medina, Y., R.C. Sotero, P.J. Toussaint, J.M. Mateos-Perez, A.C. Evans, ´
M.W. Weiner, P. Aisen, R. Petersen, C.R. Jack, W. Jagust, et al. 2016.
Early role of vascular dysregulation on late-onset Alzheimer’s disease
based on multifactorial data-driven analysis. Nat. Commun. 7:11934.
https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms11934
Jackson, W.F. 2016. Arteriolar oxygen reactivity: Where is the sensor and
what is the mechanism of action? J. Physiol. 594:5055–5077. https://doi
.org/10.1113/JP270192
Jackson, W.F. 2017. Potassium channels in regulation of vascular smooth
muscle contraction and growth. Adv. Pharmacol. 78:89–144. https://doi
.org/10.1016/bs.apha.2016.07.001
Jackson, W.F. 2022. Endothelial ion channels and cell-cell communication in
the microcirculation. Front. Physiol. 13:805149. https://doi.org/10.3389/
fphys.2022.805149
Jaggar, J.H. 2001. Intravascular pressure regulates local and global Ca(2+)
signaling in cerebral artery smooth muscle cells. Am. J. Physiol. Cell
Physiol. 281:C439–C448. https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpcell.2001.281.2.C439
Jaggar, J.H., V.A. Porter, W.J. Lederer, and M.T. Nelson. 2000. Calcium sparks
in smooth muscle. Am. J. Physiol. Cell Physiol. 278:C235–C256. https://doi
.org/10.1152/ajpcell.2000.278.2.C235
Jenkins, C.M., J. Yang, H.F. Sims, and R.W. Gross. 2011. Reversible high affinity inhibition of phosphofructokinase-1 by acyl-CoA: A mechanism
integrating glycolytic flux with lipid metabolism. J. Biol. Chem. 286:
11937–11950. https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M110.203661
Jovanovic, S., Q. Du, R.M. Crawford, G.R. Budas, I. Stagljar, and A. Jovanovi ´ c. ´
2005. Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase serves as an accessory protein of the cardiac sarcolemmal K(ATP) channel. EMBO Rep. 6:
848–852. https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.embor.7400489
Karagiannis, A., T. Gallopin, A. Lacroix, F. Plaisier, J. Piquet, H. Geoffroy, R.
Hepp, J. Naude, B. Le Gac, R. Egger, et al. 2021. Lactate is an energy ´
substrate for rodent cortical neurons and enhances their firing activity.
Elife. 10:e71424. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.71424
Kasischke, K.A., H.D. Vishwasrao, P.J. Fisher, W.R. Zipfel, and W.W. Webb.
2004. Neural activity triggers neuronal oxidative metabolism followed
by astrocytic glycolysis. Science. 305:99–103. https://doi.org/10.1126/
science.1096485
Kawano, T., V. Zoga, M. Kimura, M.-Y. Liang, H.-E. Wu, G. Gemes, J.B.
McCallum, W.-M. Kwok, Q.H. Hogan, and C.D. Sarantopoulos. 2009.
Nitric oxide activates ATP-sensitive potassium channels in mammalian
sensory neurons: Action by direct S-nitrosylation. Mol. Pain. 5:12.
https://doi.org/10.1186/1744-8069-5-12
Kim, D.-S., T.Q. Duong, and S.-G. Kim. 2000. High-resolution mapping of isoorientation columns by fMRI. Nat. Neurosci. 3:164–169. https://doi.org/
10.1038/72109
Kirst, C., S. Skriabine, A. Vieites-Prado, T. Topilko, P. Bertin, G. Gerschenfeld,
F. Verny, P. Topilko, N. Michalski, M. Tessier-Lavigne, and N. Renier.
2020. Mapping the fine-scale organization and plasticity of the brain
vasculature. Cell. 180:780–795.e25. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2020
.01.028
Klug, N.R., M. Sancho, A.L. Gonzales, T.J. Heppner, R.I.C. O’Brien, D. HillEubanks, and M.T. Nelson. 2023. Intraluminal pressure elevates intracellular calcium and contracts CNS pericytes: Role of voltage-dependent
calcium channels. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 120:e2216421120. https://doi
.org/10.1073/pnas.2216421120
Knot, H.J., and M.T. Nelson. 1995. Regulation of membrane potential and
diameter by voltage-dependent K+ channels in rabbit myogenic cerebral
arteries. Am. J. Physiol. 269:H348–H355. https://doi.org/10.1152/
ajpheart.1995.269.1.H348
Knot, H.J., and M.T. Nelson. 1998. Regulation of arterial diameter and wall
[Ca2+] in cerebral arteries of rat by membrane potential and intravascular pressure. J. Physiol. 508:199–209. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469
-7793.1998.199br.x
Kotecha, N., and M.A. Hill. 2005. Myogenic contraction in rat skeletal muscle
arterioles: Smooth muscle membrane potential and Ca(2+) signaling.
Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol. 289:H1326–H1334. https://doi.org/10
.1152/ajpheart.00323.2005
Krucker, T., A. Lang, and E.P. Meyer. 2006. New polyurethane-based material for vascular corrosion casting with improved physical and
imaging characteristics. Microsc. Res. Tech. 69:138–147. https://doi.org/
10.1002/jemt.20263
Kubo, Y., and Y. Murata. 2001. Control of rectification and permeation by two
distinct sites after the second transmembrane region in Kir2.1 K+
channel. J. Physiol. 531:645–660. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-7793.2001
.0645h.x
Kubo, M., Y. Nakaya, S. Matsuoka, K. Saito, and Y. Kuroda. 1994. Atrial natriuretic factor and isosorbide dinitrate modulate the gating of ATPsensitive K+ channels in cultured vascular smooth muscle cells. Circ. Res.
74:471–476. https://doi.org/10.1161/01.RES.74.3.471
Lamb, T.W., M.M. Cebrik, J.S. Kaiser, C.F. Belanger Jr., A.B. Munro, and A.B.
Munro. 1966. Skeletal muscle blood flow during hypercapnic hyperventilation. Respir. Physiol. 1:249–257. https://doi.org/10.1016/0034
-5687(66)90044-2
Lamb, I.R., N.M. Novielli, and C.L. Murrant. 2018. Capillary response to
skeletal muscle contraction: Evidence that redundancy between vasodilators is physiologically relevant during active hyperaemia. J. Physiol.
596:1357–1372. https://doi.org/10.1113/JP275467
Larcombe-McDouall, J., N. Buttell, N. Harrison, and S. Wray. 1999. In vivo pH
and metabolite changes during a single contraction in rat uterine
smooth muscle. J. Physiol. 518:783–790. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469
-7793.1999.0783p.x
Lederer, W.J., H. Cheng, L.F. Santana, A.M. Gomez, T.B. Rogers, M.B. Cannell,
M. Rubart, and M.T. Nelson. 1996. Molecular understanding of
excitation-contraction coupling and vascular flow control in heart
muscle. In Tissue Oxygen Deprivation: From Molecular to Integrated
Function. G.G. Haddad and G. Lister, editors. Taylor & Francis, New
York. 497–513.
Ledo, A., E. Fernandes, A. Salvador, J. Laranjinha, and R.M. Barbosa. 2022. In
vivo hydrogen peroxide diffusivity in brain tissue supports volume
signaling activity. Redox Biol. 50:102250. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.redox
.2022.102250
Ledoux, J., M.S. Taylor, A.D. Bonev, R.M. Hannah, V. Solodushko, B. Shui, Y.
Tallini, M.I. Kotlikoff, and M.T. Nelson. 2008. Functional architecture
of inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate signaling in restricted spaces of myoendothelial projections. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 105:9627–9632.
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0801963105
Lee, K.P.K., J. Chen, and R. MacKinnon. 2017. Molecular structure of human
KATP in complex with ATP and ADP. Elife. 6:e32481. https://doi.org/10
.7554/eLife.32481
Lee, M.D., C. Wilson, C.D. Saunter, C. Kennedy, J.M. Girkin, and J.G.
McCarron. 2018. Spatially structured cell populations process multiple
sensory signals in parallel in intact vascular endothelium. Sci. Signal. 11:
eaar4411. https://doi.org/10.1126/scisignal.aar4411
Lennicke, C., J. Rahn, R. Lichtenfels, L.A. Wessjohann, and B. Seliger. 2015.
Hydrogen peroxide: Production, fate and role in redox signaling of
tumor cells. Cell Commun. Signal. 13:39. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12964
-015-0118-6
Li, N., J.-X. Wu, D. Ding, J. Cheng, N. Gao, and L. Chen. 2017. Structure of a
pancreatic ATP-sensitive potassium channel. Cell. 168:101–110.e10.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2016.12.028
Li, H., C. Guglielmetti, Y.J. Sei, M. Zilberter, L.M. Le Page, L. Shields, J. Yang,
K. Nguyen, B. Tiret, X. Gao, et al. 2023. Neurons require glucose uptake
and glycolysis in vivo. Cell Rep. 42:112335. https://doi.org/10.1016/j
.celrep.2023.112335
Lindauer, U., A. Kunz, S. Schuh-Hofer, J. Vogt, J.P. Dreier, and U. Dirnagl.
2001a. Nitric oxide from perivascular nerves modulates cerebral arterial pH reactivity. Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol. 281:H1353–H1363.
https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpheart.2001.281.3.H1353
Lindauer, U., G. Royl, C. Leithner, M. Kühl, L. Gold, J. Gethmann, M. KohlBareis, A. Villringer, and U. Dirnagl. 2001b. No evidence for early
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 27 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
decrease in blood oxygenation in rat whisker cortex in response to
functional activation. Neuroimage. 13:988–1001. https://doi.org/10
.1006/nimg.2000.0709
Liss, B., and J. Roeper. 2001. Molecular physiology of neuronal K-ATP
channels (review). Mol. Membr. Biol. 18:117–127. https://doi.org/10.1080/
09687680110047373
Little, T.L., E.C. Beyer, and B.R. Duling. 1995a. Connexin 43 and connexin 40
gap junctional proteins are present in arteriolar smooth muscle and
endothelium in vivo. Am. J. Physiol. 268:H729–H739. https://doi.org/10
.1152/ajpheart.1995.268.2.H729
Little, T.L., J. Xia, and B.R. Duling. 1995b. Dye tracers define differential endothelial and smooth muscle coupling patterns within the arteriolar
wall. Circ. Res. 76:498–504. https://doi.org/10.1161/01.RES.76.3.498
Litvinukov ˇ a, M., C. Talavera-López, H. Maatz, D. Reichart, C.L. Worth, E.L. ´
Lindberg, M. Kanda, K. Polanski, M. Heinig, M. Lee, et al. 2020. Cells of
the adult human heart. Nature. 588:466–472. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41586-020-2797-4
Logothetis, N. 2000. Can current fMRI techniques reveal the microarchitecture of cortex? Nat. Neurosci. 3:413–414. https://doi.org/10
.1038/74768
Longden, T.A., and M.T. Nelson. 2015. Vascular inward rectifier K+ channels
as external K+ sensors in the control of cerebral blood flow. Microcirculation. 22:183–196. https://doi.org/10.1111/micc.12190
Longden, T.A., F. Dabertrand, D.C. Hill-Eubanks, S.E. Hammack, and M.T.
Nelson. 2014. Stress-induced glucocorticoid signaling remodels neurovascular coupling through impairment of cerebrovascular inwardly
rectifying K+ channel function. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 111:7462–7467.
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1401811111
Longden, T.A., F. Dabertrand, M. Koide, A.L. Gonzales, N.R. Tykocki, J.E.
Brayden, D. Hill-Eubanks, and M.T. Nelson. 2017. Capillary K+-sensing
initiates retrograde hyperpolarization to increase local cerebral blood
flow. Nat. Neurosci. 20:717–726. https://doi.org/10.1038/nn.4533
Longden, T.A., A. Mughal, G.W. Hennig, O.F. Harraz, B. Shui, F.K. Lee, J.C.
Lee, S. Reining, M.I. Kotlikoff, G.M. Konig, et al. 2021. Local IP ¨ 3
receptor-mediated Ca2+ signals compound to direct blood flow in brain
capillaries. Sci. Adv. 7:eabh0101. https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.abh0101
Longden, T.A., G. Zhao, A. Hariharan, and W.J. Lederer. 2023. Pericytes and
the control of blood flow in brain and heart. Annu. Rev. Physiol. 85:
137–164. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-physiol-031522-034807
López-Ot´ın, C., M.A. Blasco, L. Partridge, M. Serrano, and G. Kroemer. 2023.
Hallmarks of aging: An expanding universe. Cell. 186:243–278. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2022.11.001
Lu, Z., and R. MacKinnon. 1994. Electrostatic tuning of Mg2+ affinity in an
inward-rectifier K+ channel. Nature. 371:243–246. https://doi.org/10
.1038/371243a0
Lu, T., D. Ye, X. Wang, J.M. Seubert, J.P. Graves, J.A. Bradbury, D.C. Zeldin,
and H.-C. Lee. 2006. Cardiac and vascular KATP channels in rats are
activated by endogenous epoxyeicosatrienoic acids through different
mechanisms. J. Physiol. 575:627–644. https://doi.org/10.1113/jphysiol
.2006.113985
Lundgaard, I., B. Li, L. Xie, H. Kang, S. Sanggaard, J.D.R. Haswell, W. Sun, S.
Goldman, S. Blekot, M. Nielsen, et al. 2015. Direct neuronal glucose
uptake heralds activity-dependent increases in cerebral metabolism.
Nat. Commun. 6:6807. https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms7807
Lyons, D.G., A. Parpaleix, M. Roche, and S. Charpak. 2016. Mapping oxygen
concentration in the awake mouse brain. Elife. 5:e12024. https://doi
.org/10.7554/eLife.12024
Ma, Y., M.A. Shaik, S.H. Kim, M.G. Kozberg, D.N. Thibodeaux, H.T. Zhao, H.
Yu, and E.M.C. Hillman. 2016. Wide-field optical mapping of neural
activity and brain haemodynamics: Considerations and novel approaches. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 371:20150360. https://doi
.org/10.1098/rstb.2015.0360
MacGregor, G.G., K. Dong, C.G. Vanoye, L. Tang, G. Giebisch, and S.C. Hebert.
2002. Nucleotides and phospholipids compete for binding to the C
terminus of KATP channels. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 99:2726–2731.
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.042688899
Majmundar, A.J., W.J. Wong, and M.C. Simon. 2010. Hypoxia-inducible factors and the response to hypoxic stress. Mol. Cell. 40:294–309. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2010.09.022
Martin, G.M., C. Yoshioka, E.A. Rex, J.F. Fay, Q. Xie, M.R. Whorton, J.Z. Chen,
and S.-L. Shyng. 2017. Cryo-EM structure of the ATP-sensitive potassium channel illuminates mechanisms of assembly and gating. Elife. 6:
e24149. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.24149
Mart´ınez-François, J.R., M.C. Fernandez-Agüera, N. Nathwani, C. Lahmann, ´
V.L. Burnham, N.N. Danial, and G. Yellen. 2018. BAD and KATP channels
regulate neuron excitability and epileptiform activity. Elife. 7:e32721.
https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.32721
Masia, R., D.D. De Leon, C. MacMullen, H. McKnight, C.A. Stanley, and C.G.
Nichols. 2007. A mutation in the TMD0-L0 region of sulfonylurea
receptor-1 (L225P) causes permanent neonatal diabetes mellitus
(PNDM). Diabetes. 56:1357–1362. https://doi.org/10.2337/db06-1746
Masoud, G.N., and W. Li. 2015. HIF-1α pathway: Role, regulation and intervention for cancer therapy. Acta Pharm. Sin. B. 5:378–389. https://doi
.org/10.1016/j.apsb.2015.05.007
Matoba, T., H. Shimokawa, M. Nakashima, Y. Hirakawa, Y. Mukai, K. Hirano,
H. Kanaide, and A. Takeshita. 2000. Hydrogen peroxide is an
endothelium-derived hyperpolarizing factor in mice. J. Clin. Invest. 106:
1521–1530. https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI10506
Matsuno-Yagi, A., and Y. Hatefi. 1988. Estimation of the turnover number of
bovine heart F0F1 complexes for ATP synthesis. Biochemistry. 27:
335–340. https://doi.org/10.1021/bi00401a050
McCarron, J.G., and W. Halpern. 1990. Potassium dilates rat cerebral arteries
by two independent mechanisms. Am. J. Physiol. 259:H902–H908.
https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpheart.1990.259.3.H902
McCarron, J.G., M.D. Lee, and C. Wilson. 2017. The endothelium solves
problems that endothelial cells do not know exist. Trends Pharmacol. Sci.
38:322–338. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tips.2017.01.008
McClenaghan, C., A. Hanson, M. Sala-Rabanal, H.I. Roessler, D. Josifova, D.K.
Grange, G. van Haaften, and C.G. Nichols. 2018. Cantu syndromeassociated SUR2 (ABCC9) mutations in distinct structural domains result in KATP channel gain-of-function by differential mechanisms.
J. Biol. Chem. 293:2041–2052. https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.RA117.000351
McConell, G.K., G.D. Wadley, K. Le Plastrier, and K.C. Linden. 2020. Skeletal
muscle AMPK is not activated during 2 h of moderate intensity exercise
at ∼65% [Formula: See text] in endurance trained men. J. Physiol. 598:
3859–3870. https://doi.org/10.1113/JP277619
McGahren, E.D., J.M. Beach, and B.R. Duling. 1998. Capillaries demonstrate
changes in membrane potential in response to pharmacological stimuli.
Am. J. Physiol. 274:H60–H65. https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpheart.1998.274.1
.H60
McNay, E.C., and P.E. Gold. 2001. Age-related differences in hippocampal
extracellular fluid glucose concentration during behavioral testing and
following systemic glucose administration. J. Gerontol. A. Biol. Sci. Med.
Sci. 56:B66–B71. https://doi.org/10.1093/gerona/56.2.B66
McNay, E.C., R.C. McCarty, and P.E. Gold. 2001. Fluctuations in brain glucose
concentration during behavioral testing: Dissociations between brain
areas and between brain and blood. Neurobiol. Learn. Mem. 75:325–337.
https://doi.org/10.1006/nlme.2000.3976
Meng, G., J. Zhong, Q. Zhang, J.S.J. Wong, J. Wu, K.K. Tsia, and N. Ji. 2022.
Ultrafast two-photon fluorescence imaging of cerebral blood circulation
in the mouse brain in vivo. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 119:e2117346119.
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2117346119
Mercado, J., R. Baylie, M.F. Navedo, C. Yuan, J.D. Scott, M.T. Nelson, J.E.
Brayden, and L.F. Santana. 2014. Local control of TRPV4 channels by
AKAP150-targeted PKC in arterial smooth muscle. J. Gen. Physiol. 143:
559–575. https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.201311050
Mergenthaler, P., U. Lindauer, G.A. Dienel, and A. Meisel. 2013. Sugar for the
brain: The role of glucose in physiological and pathological brain
function. Trends Neurosci. 36:587–597. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tins
.2013.07.001
Metallo, C.M., and M.G. Vander Heiden. 2013. Understanding metabolic
regulation and its influence on cell physiology. Mol. Cell. 49:388–398.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2013.01.018
Miodonski, A., and A. Jasi ´ nski. 1979. Scanning electron microscopy of mi- ´
crocorrosion casts of the vascular bed in the skin of the spotted salamander, Salamandra salamandra L. Cell Tissue Res. 196:153–162. https://
doi.org/10.1007/BF00236356
Mironova, G.Y., P.M. Kowalewska, M. El-Lakany, C.H.T. Tran, M. Sancho, A.
Zechariah, W.F. Jackson, and D.G. Welsh. 2023. The conducted vasomotor response and the principles of electrical communication in resistance arteries. Physiol. Rev. In press.
Mita, M., M. Ito, K. Harada, I. Sugawara, H. Ueda, T. Tsuboi, and T. Kitaguchi.
2019. Green fluorescent protein-based glucose indicators report glucose
dynamics in living cells. Anal. Chem. 91:4821–4830. https://doi.org/10
.1021/acs.analchem.9b00447
Moshkforoush, A., B. Ashenagar, O.F. Harraz, F. Dabertrand, T.A. Longden,
M.T. Nelson, and N.M. Tsoukias. 2020. The capillary Kir channel as
sensor and amplifier of neuronal signals: Modeling insights on K+-
mediated neurovascular communication. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 117:
16626–16637. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2000151117
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 28 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
Mufti, R.E., S.E. Brett, C.H.T. Tran, R. Abd El-Rahman, Y. Anfinogenova, A.
El-Yazbi, W.C. Cole, P.P. Jones, S.R.W. Chen, and D.G. Welsh. 2010.
Intravascular pressure augments cerebral arterial constriction by inducing voltage-insensitive Ca2+ waves. J. Physiol. 588:3983–4005.
https://doi.org/10.1113/jphysiol.2010.193300
Murphy, M.E., and J.E. Brayden. 1995. Nitric oxide hyperpolarizes rabbit
mesenteric arteries via ATP-sensitive potassium channels. J. Physiol.
486:47–58. https://doi.org/10.1113/jphysiol.1995.sp020789
Nelson, M.T., and J.M. Quayle. 1995. Physiological roles and properties of
potassium channels in arterial smooth muscle. Am. J. Physiol. 268:
C799–C822. https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpcell.1995.268.4.C799
Nelson, M.T., H. Cheng, M. Rubart, L.F. Santana, A.D. Bonev, H.J. Knot, and
W.J. Lederer. 1995. Relaxation of arterial smooth muscle by calcium
sparks. Science. 270:633–637. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.270.5236
.633
Nichols, C.G. 2006. KATP channels as molecular sensors of cellular metabolism. Nature. 440:470–476. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature04711
Nichols, C.G., and W.J. Lederer. 1990. The regulation of ATP-sensitive K+
channel activity in intact and permeabilized rat ventricular myocytes.
J. Physiol. 423:91–110. https://doi.org/10.1113/jphysiol.1990.sp018013
Nickenig, G., and D.G. Harrison. 2002. The AT(1)-type angiotensin receptor in
oxidative stress and atherogenesis: Part I: Oxidative stress and atherogenesis. Circulation. 105:393–396. https://doi.org/10.1161/hc0302.102618
Noma, A. 1983. ATP-regulated K+ channels in cardiac muscle. Nature. 305:
147–148. https://doi.org/10.1038/305147a0
Norman, J.N., J. MacIntyre, J.R. Shearer Jr., I.M. Craigen, and G. Smith. 1970.
Effect of carbon dioxide on renal blood flow. Am. J. Physiol. 219:672–676.
https://doi.org/10.1152/ajplegacy.1970.219.3.672
Nose, K. 2000. Role of reactive oxygen species in the regulation of physiological functions. Biol. Pharm. Bull. 23:897–903. https://doi.org/10.1248/
bpb.23.897
Obel, L.F., M.S. Müller, A.B. Walls, H.M. Sickmann, L.K. Bak, H.S. Waagepetersen, and A. Schousboe. 2012. Brain glycogen-new perspectives on
its metabolic function and regulation at the subcellular level. Front.
Neuroenergetics. 4:3. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnene.2012.00003
Offenhauser, N., K. Thomsen, K. Caesar, and M. Lauritzen. 2005. Activityinduced tissue oxygenation changes in rat cerebellar cortex: Interplay
of postsynaptic activation and blood flow. J. Physiol. 565:279–294.
https://doi.org/10.1113/jphysiol.2005.082776
Ornelas, S., A.-A. Berthiaume, S.K. Bonney, V. Coelho-Santos, R.G. Underly,
A. Kremer, C.J. Guerin, S. Lippens, and A.Y. Shih. 2021. Three- ´
dimensional ultrastructure of the brain pericyte-endothelial interface.
J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 41:2185–2200. https://doi.org/10.1177/
0271678X211012836
Ottolini, M., K. Hong, E.L. Cope, Z. Daneva, L.J. DeLalio, J.D. Sokolowski, C.
Marziano, N.Y. Nguyen, J. Altschmied, J. Haendeler, et al. 2020. Local
peroxynitrite impairs endothelial transient receptor potential vanilloid
4 channels and elevates blood pressure in obesity. Circulation. 141:
1318–1333. https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.119.043385
Owen, M.K., F.A. Witzmann, M.L. McKenney, X. Lai, Z.C. Berwick, S.P.
Moberly, M. Alloosh, M. Sturek, and J.D. Tune. 2013. Perivascular adipose tissue potentiates contraction of coronary vascular smooth muscle: Influence of obesity. Circulation. 128:9–18. https://doi.org/10.1161/
CIRCULATIONAHA.112.001238
Oz, G., P.G. Henry, E.R. Seaquist, and R. Gruetter. 2003. Direct, noninvasive ¨
measurement of brain glycogen metabolism in humans. Neurochem. Int.
43:323–329. https://doi.org/10.1016/s0197-0186(03)00019-6
Oz, G., E.R. Seaquist, A. Kumar, A.B. Criego, L.E. Benedict, J.P. Rao, P.-G. ¨
Henry, P.F. Van De Moortele, and R. Gruetter. 2007. Human brain
glycogen content and metabolism: Implications on its role in brain
energy metabolism. Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab. 292:E946–E951.
https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpendo.00424.2006
Oz, G., M. DiNuzzo, A. Kumar, A. Moheet, and E.R. Seaquist. 2015. Revisiting ¨
glycogen content in the human brain. Neurochem. Res. 40:2473–2481.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11064-015-1664-4
Parpaleix, A., Y. Goulam Houssen, and S. Charpak. 2013. Imaging local neuronal activity by monitoring PO₂ transients in capillaries. Nat. Med. 19:
241–246. https://doi.org/10.1038/nm.3059
Patel, S., and S. Sharma. 2023. Respiratory acidosis. In StatPearls. StatPearls
Publishing, Treasure Island, FL.
Patel, A.B., J.C. Lai, G.M. Chowdhury, F. Hyder, D.L. Rothman, R.G. Shulman,
and K.L. Behar. 2014. Direct evidence for activity-dependent glucose
phosphorylation in neurons with implications for the astrocyte-toneuron lactate shuttle. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 111:5385–5390. https://
doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1403576111
Pellerin, L., and P.J. Magistretti. 1994. Glutamate uptake into astrocytes
stimulates aerobic glycolysis: A mechanism coupling neuronal activity
to glucose utilization. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 91:10625–10629. https://
doi.org/10.1073/pnas.91.22.10625
Peng, W., C. Tan, L. Mo, J. Jiang, W. Zhou, J. Du, X. Zhou, X. Liu, and L. Chen.
2021. Glucose transporter 3 in neuronal glucose metabolism: Health and
diseases. Metabolism. 123:154869. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.metabol.2021
.154869
Pipatpolkai, T., R.A. Corey, P. Proks, F.M. Ashcroft, and P.J. Stansfeld. 2020.
Evaluating inositol phospholipid interactions with inward rectifier
potassium channels and characterising their role in disease. Commun.
Chem. 3:147. https://doi.org/10.1038/s42004-020-00391-0
Porter, V.A., A.D. Bonev, H.J. Knot, T.J. Heppner, A.S. Stevenson, T. Kleppisch, W.J. Lederer, and M.T. Nelson. 1998. Frequency modulation of
Ca2+ sparks is involved in regulation of arterial diameter by cyclic
nucleotides. Am. J. Physiol. 274:C1346–C1355. https://doi.org/10.1152/
ajpcell.1998.274.5.C1346
Pratt, E.B., Q. Zhou, J.W. Gay, and S.L. Shyng. 2012. Engineered interaction between SUR1 and Kir6.2 that enhances ATP sensitivity in KATP
channels. J. Gen. Physiol. 140:175–187. https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp
.201210803
Prichard, J., D. Rothman, E. Novotny, O. Petroff, T. Kuwabara, M. Avison, A.
Howseman, C. Hanstock, and R. Shulman. 1991. Lactate rise detected by
1H NMR in human visual cortex during physiologic stimulation. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 88:5829–5831. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.88.13
.5829
Proks, P., H. de Wet, and F.M. Ashcroft. 2010. Activation of the K(ATP)
channel by Mg-nucleotide interaction with SUR1. J. Gen. Physiol. 136:
389–405. https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.201010475
Proks, P., H. de Wet, and F.M. Ashcroft. 2014. Sulfonylureas suppress the
stimulatory action of Mg-nucleotides on Kir6.2/SUR1 but not Kir6.2/
SUR2A KATP channels: A mechanistic study. J. Gen. Physiol. 144:
469–486. https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.201411222
Quinn, K.V., Y. Cui, J.P. Giblin, L.H. Clapp, and A. Tinker. 2003. Do anionic
phospholipids serve as cofactors or second messengers for the regulation of activity of cloned ATP-sensitive K+ channels? Circ. Res. 93:
646–655. https://doi.org/10.1161/01.RES.0000095247.81449.8E
Quistorff, B., Rabinowitz, J.D., and S. Enerback. 2020. Lactate: The ugly ¨
duckling of energy metabolism. Nat. Metab. 2:566–571. https://doi.org/
10.1038/s42255-020-0243-4
Raeis, V., P. Philip-Couderc, A. Roatti, W. Habre, J. Sierra, A. Kalangos, M.
Beghetti, and A.J. Baertschi. 2010. Central venous hypoxemia is a determinant of human atrial ATP-sensitive potassium channel expression: Evidence for a novel hypoxia-inducible factor 1alpha-Forkhead
box class O signaling pathway. Hypertension. 55:1186–1192. https://doi
.org/10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.109.148767
Raichle, M.E., and M.A. Mintun. 2006. Brain work and brain imaging. Annu.
Rev. Neurosci. 29:449–476. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.neuro.29
.051605.112819
Rasmussen, R., E. Nicholas, N.C. Petersen, A.G. Dietz, Q. Xu, Q. Sun, and M.
Nedergaard. 2019. Cortex-wide changes in extracellular potassium ions
parallel brain state transitions in awake behaving mice. Cell Rep. 28:
1182–1194.e4. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2019.06.082
Ratelade, J., N.R. Klug, D. Lombardi, M.K.S.C. Angelim, F. Dabertrand, V.
Domenga-Denier, R. Al-Shahi Salman, C. Smith, J.-F. Gerbeau, M.T.
Nelson, and A. Joutel. 2020. Reducing hypermuscularization of the
transitional segment between arterioles and capillaries protects against
spontaneous intracerebral hemorrhage. Circulation. 141:2078–2094.
https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.119.040963
Ray, R., C.E. Murdoch, M. Wang, C.X. Santos, M. Zhang, S. Alom-Ruiz, N.
Anilkumar, A. Ouattara, A.C. Cave, S.J. Walker, et al. 2011. Endothelial
Nox4 NADPH oxidase enhances vasodilatation and reduces blood
pressure in vivo. Arterioscler. Thromb. Vasc. Biol. 31:1368–1376. https://
doi.org/10.1161/ATVBAHA.110.219238
Reimann, F., F.M. Gribble, and F.M. Ashcroft. 2000. Differential response of
K(ATP) channels containing SUR2A or SUR2B subunits to nucleotides
and pinacidil. Mol. Pharmacol. 58:1318–1325. https://doi.org/10.1124/mol
.58.6.1318
Rhodin, J.A. 1967. The ultrastructure of mammalian arterioles and precapillary sphincters. J. Ultrastruct. Res. 18:181–223. https://doi.org/10.1016/
S0022-5320(67)80239-9
Rich, P.R. 2003. The molecular machinery of Keilin’s respiratory chain. Biochem. Soc. Trans. 31:1095–1105. https://doi.org/10.1042/bst0311095
Richardson, R.S., E.A. Noyszewski, K.F. Kendrick, J.S. Leigh, and P.D. Wagner. 1995. Myoglobin O2 desaturation during exercise. Evidence of
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 29 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
limited O2 transport. J. Clin. Invest. 96:1916–1926. https://doi.org/10
.1172/JCI118237
Ritterhoff, J., and R. Tian. 2017. Metabolism in cardiomyopathy: Every substrate matters. Cardiovasc. Res. 113:411–421. https://doi.org/10.1093/cvr/
cvx017
Rodriguez-Baeza, A., F. Reina-De La Torre, M. Ortega-Sanchez, and J. Sahuquillo-Barris. 1998. Perivascular structures in corrosion casts of the
human central nervous system: A confocal laser and scanning electron
microscope study. Anat. Rec. 252:176–184. https://doi.org/10.1002/(SICI)
1097-0185(199810)252:2<176::AID-AR3>3.0.CO;2-1
Rosano, G.M., and C. Vitale. 2018. Metabolic modulation of cardiac metabolism in heart failure. Card. Fail. Rev. 4:99–103. https://doi.org/10.15420/
cfr.2018.18.2
Rosehart, A.C., T.A. Longden, N. Weir, J.T. Fontaine, A. Joutel, and F. Dabertrand. 2021. Prostaglandin E2 dilates intracerebral arterioles when
applied to capillaries: Implications for small vessel diseases. Front. Aging
Neurosci. 13:695965. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnagi.2021.695965
Roth, K., and M.W. Weiner. 1991. Determination of cytosolic ADP and AMP
concentrations and the free energy of ATP hydrolysis in human muscle
and brain tissues with 31P NMR spectroscopy. Magn. Reson. Med. 22:
505–511. https://doi.org/10.1002/mrm.1910220258
Rouach, N., A. Koulakoff, V. Abudara, K. Willecke, and C. Giaume. 2008.
Astroglial metabolic networks sustain hippocampal synaptic transmission. Science. 322:1551–1555. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1164022
Rui, L. 2014. Energy metabolism in the liver. Compr. Physiol. 4:177–197.
https://doi.org/10.1002/cphy.c130024
Sagare, A.P., R.D. Bell, Z. Zhao, Q. Ma, E.A. Winkler, A. Ramanathan, and B.V.
Zlokovic. 2013. Pericyte loss influences Alzheimer-like neurodegeneration in mice. Nat. Commun. 4:2932. https://doi.org/10.1038/
ncomms3932
Sakadzic, S., E. Roussakis, M.A. Yaseen, E.T. Mandeville, V.J. Srinivasan, K. ´
Arai, S. Ruvinskaya, A. Devor, E.H. Lo, S.A. Vinogradov, and D.A. Boas.
2010. Two-photon high-resolution measurement of partial pressure of
oxygen in cerebral vasculature and tissue. Nat. Methods. 7:755–759.
https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.1490
Sancho, M., N.R. Klug, A. Mughal, M. Koide, S.H.l. Cruz, T.J. Heppner, A.D.
Bonev, D. Hill-Eubanks, and M.T. Nelson. 2022. Adenosine signaling
activates ATP-sensitive K+ channels in endothelial cells and pericytes in CNS capillaries. Sci. Signal. 15:eabl5405. https://doi.org/10
.1126/scisignal.abl5405
Satoh, E., M. Yamada, C. Kondo, V.P. Repunte, Y. Horio, T. Iijima, and Y.
Kurachi. 1998. Intracellular nucleotide-mediated gating of SUR/Kir6.0
complex potassium channels expressed in a mammalian cell line and its
modification by pinacidil. J. Physiol. 511:663–674. https://doi.org/10.1111/
j.1469-7793.1998.663bg.x
Schultz, S.G. 1997. Pump-leak parallelism in sodium-absorbing epithelia: The
role of ATP-regulated potassium channels. J. Exp. Zool. 279:476–483.
https://doi.org/10.1002/(SICI)1097-010X(19971201)279:5<476::AID
-JEZ10>3.0.CO;2-6
Segal, S.S., and B.R. Duling. 1989. Conduction of vasomotor responses in arterioles: A role for cell-to-cell coupling? Am. J. Physiol. 256:H838–H845.
https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpheart.1989.256.3.H838
Segal, S.S., D.N. Damon, and B.R. Duling. 1989. Propagation of vasomotor
responses coordinates arteriolar resistances. Am. J. Physiol. 256:
H832–H837. https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpheart.1989.256.3.H832
Seino, S., and T. Miki. 2003. Physiological and pathophysiological roles of
ATP-sensitive K+ channels. Prog. Biophys. Mol. Biol. 81:133–176. https://
doi.org/10.1016/S0079-6107(02)00053-6
Sepp, M., N. Sokolova, S. Jugai, M. Mandel, P. Peterson, and M. Vendelin.
2014. Tight coupling of Na+/K+-ATPase with glycolysis demonstrated in
permeabilized rat cardiomyocytes. PLoS One. 9:e99413. https://doi.org/
10.1371/journal.pone.0099413
Shi, Y., Z. Wu, N. Cui, W. Shi, Y. Yang, X. Zhang, A. Rojas, B.T. Ha, and C.
Jiang. 2007. PKA phosphorylation of SUR2B subunit underscores vascular KATP channel activation by beta-adrenergic receptors. Am.
J. Physiol. Regul. Integr. Comp. Physiol. 293:R1205–R1214. https://doi.org/
10.1152/ajpregu.00337.2007
Shi, Y., X. Chen, Z. Wu, W. Shi, Y. Yang, N. Cui, C. Jiang, and R.W. Harrison.
2008. cAMP-dependent protein kinase phosphorylation produces interdomain movement in SUR2B leading to activation of the vascular
KATP channel. J. Biol. Chem. 283:7523–7530. https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc
.M709941200
Shyng, S., and C.G. Nichols. 1997. Octameric stoichiometry of the KATP
channel complex. J. Gen. Physiol. 110:655–664. https://doi.org/10.1085/
jgp.110.6.655
Shyng, S.L., and C.G. Nichols. 1998. Membrane phospholipid control of nucleotide sensitivity of KATP channels. Science. 282:1138–1141. https://doi
.org/10.1126/science.282.5391.1138
Simpson, I.A., D. Dwyer, D. Malide, K.H. Moley, A. Travis, and S.J. Vannucci.
2008. The facilitative glucose transporter GLUT3: 20 years of distinction. Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab. 295:E242–E253. https://doi.org/10
.1152/ajpendo.90388.2008
Sirotin, Y.B., E.M.C. Hillman, C. Bordier, and A. Das. 2009. Spatiotemporal
precision and hemodynamic mechanism of optical point spreads in alert
primates. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 106:18390–18395. https://doi.org/10
.1073/pnas.0905509106
Song, H.W., K.L. Foreman, B.D. Gastfriend, J.S. Kuo, S.P. Palecek, and E.V.
Shusta. 2020. Transcriptomic comparison of human and mouse brain
microvessels. Sci. Rep. 10:12358. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020
-69096-7
Sonkusare, S.K., A.D. Bonev, J. Ledoux, W. Liedtke, M.I. Kotlikoff, T.J.
Heppner, D.C. Hill-Eubanks, and M.T. Nelson. 2012. Elementary Ca2+
signals through endothelial TRPV4 channels regulate vascular function.
Science. 336:597–601. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1216283
Sonkusare, S.K., T. Dalsgaard, A.D. Bonev, D.C. Hill-Eubanks, M.I. Kotlikoff,
J.D. Scott, L.F. Santana, and M.T. Nelson. 2014. AKAP150-dependent
cooperative TRPV4 channel gating is central to endotheliumdependent vasodilation and is disrupted in hypertension. Sci. Signal.
7:ra66. https://doi.org/10.1126/scisignal.2005052
Sonkusare, S.K., T. Dalsgaard, A.D. Bonev, and M.T. Nelson. 2016. Inward
rectifier potassium (Kir2.1) channels as end-stage boosters of
endothelium-dependent vasodilators. J. Physiol. 594:3271–3285. https://
doi.org/10.1113/JP271652
Spruce, A.E., N.B. Standen, and P.R. Stanfield. 1985. Voltage-dependent ATPsensitive potassium channels of skeletal muscle membrane. Nature. 316:
736–738. https://doi.org/10.1038/316736a0
Stamler, J.S., and G. Meissner. 2001. Physiology of nitric oxide in skeletal
muscle. Physiol. Rev. 81:209–237. https://doi.org/10.1152/physrev.2001
.81.1.209
Standen, N.B., J.M. Quayle, N.W. Davies, J.E. Brayden, Y. Huang, and M.T.
Nelson. 1989. Hyperpolarizing vasodilators activate ATP-sensitive K+
channels in arterial smooth muscle. Science. 245:177–180. https://doi
.org/10.1126/science.2501869
Stockli, J., D.J. Fazakerley, and D.E. James. 2011. GLUT4 exocytosis. ¨ J. Cell Sci.
124:4147–4159. https://doi.org/10.1242/jcs.097063
Straub, S.V., H. Girouard, P.E. Doetsch, R.M. Hannah, M.K. Wilkerson, and
M.T. Nelson. 2009. Regulation of intracerebral arteriolar tone by K(v)
channels: Effects of glucose and PKC. Am. J. Physiol. Cell Physiol. 297:
C788–C796. https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpcell.00148.2009
Straub, A.C., A.W. Lohman, M. Billaud, S.R. Johnstone, S.T. Dwyer, M.Y. Lee,
P.S. Bortz, A.K. Best, L. Columbus, B. Gaston, and B.E. Isakson. 2012.
Endothelial cell expression of haemoglobin α regulates nitric oxide
signalling. Nature. 491:473–477. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature11626
Straub, A.C., A.C. Zeigler, and B.E. Isakson. 2014. The myoendothelial junction: Connections that deliver the message. Physiology. 29:242–249.
https://doi.org/10.1152/physiol.00042.2013
Sugiura, K., S. Mihara, N. Fu, and T. Hisabori. 2020. Real-time monitoring of
the in vivo redox state transition using the ratiometric redox state
sensor protein FROG/B. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 117:16019–16026.
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1918919117
Sullivan, M.N., A.L. Gonzales, P.W. Pires, A. Bruhl, M.D. Leo, W. Li, A. Oulidi,
F.A. Boop, Y. Feng, J.H. Jaggar, et al. 2015. Localized TRPA1 channel Ca2+
signals stimulated by reactive oxygen species promote cerebral artery
dilation. Sci. Signal. 8:ra2. https://doi.org/10.1126/scisignal.2005659
Sung, M.W., Z. Yang, C.M. Driggers, B.L. Patton, B. Mostofian, J.D. Russo, D.M.
Zuckerman, and S.-L. Shyng. 2021. Vascular KATP channel structural
dynamics reveal regulatory mechanism by Mg-nucleotides. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA. 118:e2109441118. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2109441118
Tabula Muris Consortium. 2020. A single-cell transcriptomic atlas characterizes ageing tissues in the mouse. Nature. 583:590–595. https://doi
.org/10.1038/s41586-020-2496-1
Taggart, M.J., and S. Wray. 1998. Hypoxia and smooth muscle function: Key
regulatory events during metabolic stress. J. Physiol. 509:315–325.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-7793.1998.315bn.x
Tajada, S., C.M. Moreno, S. O’Dwyer, S. Woods, D. Sato, M.F. Navedo, and L.F.
Santana. 2017. Distance constraints on activation of TRPV4 channels by
AKAP150-bound PKCα in arterial myocytes. J. Gen. Physiol. 149:639–659.
https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.201611709
Takeda, Y., M.A. Nystoriak, M. Nieves-Cintrón, L.F. Santana, and M.F. Navedo. 2011. Relationship between Ca2+ sparklets and sarcoplasmic
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 30 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
reticulum Ca2+ load and release in rat cerebral arterial smooth muscle.
Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol. 301:H2285–H2294. https://doi.org/10
.1152/ajpheart.00488.2011
Tammaro, P., and F. Ashcroft. 2007. The Kir6.2-F333I mutation differentially
modulates KATP channels composed of SUR1 or SUR2 subunits.
J. Physiol. 581:1259–1269. https://doi.org/10.1113/jphysiol.2007.130211
Tantama, M., J.R. Mart´ınez-François, R. Mongeon, and G. Yellen. 2013.
Imaging energy status in live cells with a fluorescent biosensor of the
intracellular ATP-to-ADP ratio. Nat. Commun. 4:2550. https://doi.org/10
.1038/ncomms3550
Tao, X., J.L. Avalos, J. Chen, and R. MacKinnon. 2009. Crystal structure of the
eukaryotic strong inward-rectifier K+ channel Kir2.2 at 3.1 A resolution.
Science. 326:1668–1674. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1180310
Thakore, P., M.G. Alvarado, S. Ali, A. Mughal, P.W. Pires, E. Yamasaki, H.A.T.
Pritchard, B.E. Isakson, C.H.T. Tran, and S. Earley. 2021. Brain endothelial cell TRPA1 channels initiate neurovascular coupling. Elife. 10:
e63040. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.63040
Thompson, J.K., M.R. Peterson, and R.D. Freeman. 2003. Single-neuron activity and tissue oxygenation in the cerebral cortex. Science. 299:
1070–1072. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1079220
Thompson, J.K., M.R. Peterson, and R.D. Freeman. 2004. High-resolution
neurometabolic coupling revealed by focal activation of visual neurons. Nat. Neurosci. 7:919–920. https://doi.org/10.1038/nn1308
Thorens, B., and M. Mueckler. 2010. Glucose transporters in the 21st century.
Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab. 298:E141–E145. https://doi.org/10.1152/
ajpendo.00712.2009
Tran, C.H.T., M.S. Taylor, F. Plane, S. Nagaraja, N.M. Tsoukias, V. Solodushko, E.J. Vigmond, T. Furstenhaupt, M. Brigdan, and D.G. Welsh.
2012. Endothelial Ca2+ wavelets and the induction of myoendothelial
feedback. Am. J. Physiol. Cell Physiol. 302:C1226–C1242. https://doi.org/
10.1152/ajpcell.00418.2011
Trapp, S., S. Haider, P. Jones, M.S. Sansom, and F.M. Ashcroft. 2003. Identification of residues contributing to the ATP binding site of Kir6.2.
EMBO J. 22:2903–2912. https://doi.org/10.1093/emboj/cdg282
Tsoukias, N.M., D. Goldman, A. Vadapalli, R.N. Pittman, and A.S. Popel. 2007.
A computational model of oxygen delivery by hemoglobin-based oxygen carriers in three-dimensional microvascular networks. J. Theor.
Biol. 248:657–674. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtbi.2007.06.012
Tykocki, N.R., E.M. Boerman, and W.F. Jackson. 2017. Smooth muscle ion
channels and regulation of vascular tone in resistance arteries and
arterioles. Compr. Physiol. 7:485–581. https://doi.org/10.1002/cphy
.c160011
Tzou, W.S., C.E. Korcarz, S.E. Aeschlimann, B.J. Morgan, J.B. Skatrud, and J.H.
Stein. 2007. Coronary flow velocity changes in response to hypercapnia: Assessment by transthoracic Doppler echocardiography. J. Am. Soc.
Echocardiogr. 20:421–426. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.echo.2006.10.002
Urbach, V., E. Van Kerkhove, D. Maguire, and B.J. Harvey. 1996. Cross-talk
between ATP-regulated K+ channels and Na+ transport via cellular
metabolism in frog skin principal cells. J. Physiol. 491:99–109. https://doi
.org/10.1113/jphysiol.1996.sp021199
Vanlandewijck, M., L. He, M.A. Mae, J. Andrae, K. Ando, F. Del Gaudio, K. ¨
Nahar, T. Lebouvier, B. Laviña, L. Gouveia, et al. 2018. A molecular atlas
of cell types and zonation in the brain vasculature. Nature. 554:475–480.
https://doi.org/10.1038/nature25739
Vanzetta, I., and A. Grinvald. 2001. Evidence and lack of evidence for the
initial dip in the anesthetized rat: Implications for human functional
brain imaging. Neuroimage. 13:959–967. https://doi.org/10.1006/nimg
.2001.0843
Voet, D., J.G. Voet, and C.W. Pratt. 2016. Fundamentals of Biochemistry Life at
the Molecular Level. Wiley, Hoboken, NJ.
Voleti, V., K.B. Patel, W. Li, C. Perez Campos, S. Bharadwaj, H. Yu, C. Ford,
M.J. Casper, R.W. Yan, W. Liang, et al. 2019. Real-time volumetric microscopy of in vivo dynamics and large-scale samples with SCAPE 2.0.
Nat. Methods. 16:1054–1062. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-019-0579-4
Wagner, P.D. 2012. Muscle intracellular oxygenation during exercise: Optimization for oxygen transport, metabolism, and adaptive change. Eur.
J. Appl. Physiol. 112:1–8. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00421-011-1955-7
Wall, M., and N. Dale. 2008. Activity-dependent release of adenosine: A
critical re-evaluation of mechanism. Curr. Neuropharmacol. 6:329–337.
https://doi.org/10.2174/157015908787386087
Wang, X., J. Wu, L. Li, F. Chen, R. Wang, and C. Jiang. 2003. Hypercapnic
acidosis activates KATP channels in vascular smooth muscles. Circ. Res.
92:1225–1232. https://doi.org/10.1161/01.RES.0000075601.95738.6D
Wang, Z., Z. Ying, A. Bosy-Westphal, J. Zhang, B. Schautz, W. Later, S.B.
Heymsfield, and M.J. Müller. 2010. Specific metabolic rates of major
organs and tissues across adulthood: Evaluation by mechanistic model
of resting energy expenditure. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 92:1369–1377. https://
doi.org/10.3945/ajcn.2010.29885
Wang, F., Y. Cao, L. Ma, H. Pei, W.D. Rausch, and H. Li. 2018. Dysfunction of
cerebrovascular endothelial cells: Prelude to vascular dementia. Front.
Aging Neurosci. 10:376. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnagi.2018.00376
Weidemann, A., and R.S. Johnson. 2008. Biology of HIF-1α. Cell Death Differ.
15:621–627. https://doi.org/10.1038/cdd.2008.12
Weiss, J.N., N. Venkatesh, and S.T. Lamp. 1992. ATP-sensitive K+ channels
and cellular K+ loss in hypoxic and ischaemic mammalian ventricle.
J. Physiol. 447:649–673. https://doi.org/10.1113/jphysiol.1992.sp019022
Welsh, D.G., and S.S. Segal. 1998. Endothelial and smooth muscle cell conduction in arterioles controlling blood flow. Am. J. Physiol. 274:
H178–H186. https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpheart.1998.274.1.H178
Wende, A.R., M.K. Brahma, G.R. McGinnis, and M.E. Young. 2017. Metabolic
origins of heart failure. JACC Basic Transl. Sci. 2:297–310. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jacbts.2016.11.009
West, G.A., D.C. Leppla, and J.M. Simard. 1992. Effects of external pH on ionic
currents in smooth muscle cells from the basilar artery of the Guinea
pig. Circ. Res. 71:201–209. https://doi.org/10.1161/01.RES.71.1.201
Wilson, C., C.D. Saunter, J.M. Girkin, and J.G. McCarron. 2015. Pressuredependent regulation of Ca2+ signalling in the vascular endothelium.
J. Physiol. 593:5231–5253. https://doi.org/10.1113/JP271157
Wolfle, S.E., D.J. Chaston, K. Goto, S.L. Sandow, F.R. Edwards, and C.E. Hill. ¨
2011. Non-linear relationship between hyperpolarisation and relaxation
enables long distance propagation of vasodilatation. J. Physiol. 589:
2607–2623. https://doi.org/10.1113/jphysiol.2010.202580
Wray, S., and T. Burdyga. 2010. Sarcoplasmic reticulum function in smooth
muscle. Physiol. Rev. 90:113–178. https://doi.org/10.1152/physrev.00018.2008
Wu, J.-X., D. Ding, M. Wang, Y. Kang, X. Zeng, and L. Chen. 2018. Ligand
binding and conformational changes of SUR1 subunit in pancreatic
ATP-sensitive potassium channels. Protein Cell. 9:553–567. https://doi
.org/10.1007/s13238-018-0530-y
Wu, Z., Y. Cui, H. Wang, H. Wu, Y. Wan, B. Li, L. Wang, S. Pan, W. Peng, A.
Dong, et al. 2023. Neuronal activity-induced, equilibrative nucleoside
transporter-dependent, somatodendritic adenosine release revealed by
a GRAB sensor. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 120:e2212387120. https://doi
.org/10.1073/pnas.2212387120
Xi, Q., A. Adebiyi, G. Zhao, K.E. Chapman, C.M. Waters, A. Hassid, and J.H.
Jaggar. 2008. IP3 constricts cerebral arteries via IP3 receptormediated TRPC3 channel activation and independently of sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca2+ release. Circ. Res. 102:1118–1126. https://doi
.org/10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.108.173948
Xia, J., and B.R. Duling. 1998. Patterns of excitation-contraction coupling in
arterioles: Dependence on time and concentration. Am. J. Physiol. 274:
H323–H330. https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpheart.1998.274.1.H323
Xie, L.-H., S.A. John, and J.N. Weiss. 2002. Spermine block of the strong inward
rectifier potassium channel Kir2.1: Dual roles of surface charge screening and
pore block. J. Gen. Physiol. 120:53–66. https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.20028576
Yamada, M., S. Isomoto, S. Matsumoto, C. Kondo, T. Shindo, Y. Horio, and Y.
Kurachi. 1997. Sulphonylurea receptor 2B and Kir6.1 form a
sulphonylurea-sensitive but ATP-insensitive K+ channel. J. Physiol. 499:
715–720. https://doi.org/10.1113/jphysiol.1997.sp021963
Yamamoto, Y., K. Imaeda, and H. Suzuki. 1999. Endothelium-dependent
hyperpolarization and intercellular electrical coupling in Guinea-pig
mesenteric arterioles. J. Physiol. 514:505–513. https://doi.org/10.1111/j
.1469-7793.1999.505ae.x
Yamamura, H., Y. Suzuki, H. Yamamura, K. Asai, W. Giles, and Y. Imaizumi.
2018. Hypoxic stress upregulates Kir2.1 expression by a pathway including hypoxic-inducible factor-1α and dynamin2 in brain capillary
endothelial cells. Am. J. Physiol. Cell Physiol. 315:C202–C213. https://doi
.org/10.1152/ajpcell.00154.2017
Yamanishi, S., K. Katsumura, T. Kobayashi, and D.G. Puro. 2006. Extracellular lactate as a dynamic vasoactive signal in the rat retinal microvasculature. Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol. 290:H925–H934. https://
doi.org/10.1152/ajpheart.01012.2005
Yang, H.-Q., E. Subbotina, R. Ramasamy, and W.A. Coetzee. 2016. Cardiovascular KATP channels and advanced aging. Pathobiol. Aging Age Relat.
Dis. 6:32517. https://doi.org/10.3402/pba.v6.32517
Yang, H.-Q., W. Martinez-Ortiz, J. Hwang, X. Fan, T.J. Cardozo, and W.A.
Coetzee. 2020. Palmitoylation of the KATP channel Kir6.2 subunit promotes channel opening by regulating PIP2 sensitivity. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. USA. 117:10593–10602. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1918088117
Yang, A.C., R.T. Vest, F. Kern, D.P. Lee, M. Agam, C.A. Maat, P.M. Losada,
M.B. Chen, N. Schaum, N. Khoury, et al. 2022. A human brain vascular
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 31 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
atlas reveals diverse mediators of Alzheimer’s risk. Nature. 603:
885–892. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-021-04369-3
Yaniv, Y., M. Juhaszova, H.B. Nuss, S. Wang, D.B. Zorov, E.G. Lakatta, and S.J.
Sollott. 2010. Matching ATP supply and demand in mammalian heart:
In vivo, in vitro, and in silico perspectives. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 1188:
133–142. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1749-6632.2009.05093.x
Young, J. 1929. Malpighi’s “De Pulmonibus”. Proc. R. Soc. Med. 23:1–11. https://
doi.org/10.1177/003591572902300101
Yuan, H.-X., Y. Xiong, and K.-L. Guan. 2013. Nutrient sensing, metabolism,
and cell growth control. Mol. Cell. 49:379–387. https://doi.org/10.1016/j
.molcel.2013.01.019
Zambach, S.A., C. Cai, H.C.C. Helms, B.O. Hald, Y. Dong, J.C. Fordsmann, R.M.
Nielsen, J. Hu, M. Lønstrup, B. Brodin, and M.J. Lauritzen. 2021.
Precapillary sphincters and pericytes at first-order capillaries as key
regulators for brain capillary perfusion. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 118:
e2023749118. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2023749118
Zhao, C., and R. MacKinnon. 2021. Molecular structure of an open human
KATP channel. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 118:e2112267118. https://doi.org/
10.1073/pnas.2112267118
Zhao, G., H.C. Joca, M.T. Nelson, and W.J. Lederer. 2020a. ATP- and voltagedependent electro-metabolic signaling regulates blood flow in heart.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 117:7461–7470. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas
.1922095117
Zhao, G., H.C. Joca, and W.J. Lederer. 2020b. Dynamic measurement and
imaging of capillaries, arterioles, and pericytes in mouse heart. J. Vis.
Exp. https://doi.org/10.3791/61566
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 32 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024



HYPOTHESIS
Electro-metabolic signaling
Thomas A. Longden1,2 and W. Jonathan Lederer1,3
Precise matching of energy substrate delivery to local metabolic needs is essential for the health and function of all tissues.
Here, we outline a mechanistic framework for understanding this critical process, which we refer to as electro-metabolic
signaling (EMS). All tissues exhibit changes in metabolism over varying spatiotemporal scales and have widely varying
energetic needs and reserves. We propose that across tissues, common signatures of elevated metabolism or increases in
energy substrate usage that exceed key local thresholds rapidly engage mechanisms that generate hyperpolarizing electrical
signals in capillaries that then relax contractile elements throughout the vasculature to quickly adjust blood flow to meet
changing needs. The attendant increase in energy substrate delivery serves to meet local metabolic requirements and thus
avoids a mismatch in supply and demand and prevents metabolic stress. We discuss in detail key examples of EMS that our
laboratories have discovered in the brain and the heart, and we outline potential further EMS mechanisms operating in
tissues such as skeletal muscle, pancreas, and kidney. We suggest that the energy imbalance evoked by EMS uncoupling may
be central to cellular dysfunction from which the hallmarks of aging and metabolic diseases emerge and may lead to
generalized organ failure states—such as diverse flavors of heart failure and dementia. Understanding and manipulating EMS
may be key to preventing or reversing these dysfunctions.
Introduction
From the exquisitely elegant, computationally intense functions
of the brain to the error-free pumping of the heart across activity levels, there is a constant requirement that energy is
supplied to tissues and waste products are removed in an efficient manner. At the cellular level, the maintenance of ionic
gradients across the plasma membrane, protein synthesis and
transport, the processes of cell division, growth, and repair
(Buttgereit and Brand, 1995), and the diverse operations beyond
these are all inextricably tied to the ready availability of local
energy substrates. As these substrates are delivered via the
bloodstream, it makes all cells in all tissues critically dependent
on an optimized vascular function to direct blood to areas of
metabolic need at exactly the right moment. Understanding
exactly how this task is achieved throughout the body has engaged cardiovascular biologists since the earliest descriptions of
the circulatory system (Young, 1929; Harvey, 1957). Now with
the advent of modern molecular, electrophysiological, and imaging techniques, substantial progress has been made in determining the structure and function of the vascular system at high
resolution (Blinder et al., 2013; Tykocki et al., 2017; Vanlandewijck
et al., 2018; Hariharan et al., 2020; Kirst et al., 2020; Jackson,
2022; Meng et al., 2022). Together, these data enable precision
measurements of blood flow control spanning the molecular
to the systems levels. However, we still have an incomplete
understanding of how blood flow through tissues with highly
varied energetic demands is mapped to metabolic needs at the
organ, local network, and individual cell levels.
The EMS hypothesis
A diverse set of electro-metabolic signaling (EMS) mechanisms
operate throughout organ systems to precisely match local
energy demand with supply via capillary electrical signaling
to tightly control blood flow.
In this article, we set out the concept of EMS as a framework
to garner a new understanding of local blood flow control
mechanisms, which we have been developing over a number of
years (Lederer et al., 1996; Longden et al., 2017; Zhao et al.,
2020a). We hypothesize that this provides the core mechanistic link that enables the matching of energy demand to the delivery of increased blood flow across all organ systems (Fig. 1).
Here, we outline the theoretical basis of this unifying EMS hypothesis and underscore the technical developments that are
needed to accelerate progress in studying this phenomenon. The
core predictions made by the EMS hypothesis are:
............................................................................................................................................................................. 1
Department of Physiology, University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA; 2
Laboratory of Neurovascular Interactions, Center for Biomedical Engineering
and Technology, University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA; 3
Laboratory of Molecular Cardiology, Center for Biomedical Engineering and Technology,
University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.
Correspondence to Thomas A. Longden: thomas.longden@som.umaryland.edu; W. Jonathan Lederer: jlederer@som.umaryland.edu.
© 2024 Longden and Lederer. This article is distributed under the terms of an Attribution–Noncommercial–Share Alike–No Mirror Sites license for the first six months
after the publication date (see http://www.rupress.org/terms/). After six months it is available under a Creative Commons License (Attribution–Noncommercial–Share Alike
4.0 International license, as described at https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/).
Rockefeller University Press https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451 1 of 32
J. Gen. Physiol. 2024 Vol. 156 No. 2 e202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
• Energy-intensive processes in all organ systems should couple
to local hyperemia, as has been established for brain, heart,
and skeletal muscle among others.
• The signaling mechanisms that couple energy usage to
blood flow should satisfy the hallmarks of EMS, which we
outline below.
• EMS mechanisms operating in different organ systems should
share the same basis (Fig. 1) but may be tailored to suit the
particular spatiotemporal energy needs of the local tissue.
• Uncoupling of EMS should disrupt the matching of energy
supply to local demand and thereby may precipitate a range of
tissue dysfunction.
We explore these predictions in detail and outline key outstanding questions that need to be addressed to subject this
hypothesis to rigorous attempts at falsification.
Energy substrate supply and metabolism
The nanobattery adenosine triphosphate (ATP) stores energy
within its hydrolyzable phosphate–phosphate bonds that can be
tapped through serial chemical reactions to release energy to
power work throughout the cell. These reactions yield adenosine
diphosphate (ADP) and subsequently adenosine monophosphate
(AMP), which can then be further processed into adenosine.
Most often, however, ADP is rapidly phosphorylated back to ATP
to recharge the battery. Thus, cellular processes are primarily
fueled by the free energy liberated from the transfer of phosphoryl groups from ATP to acceptor molecules. The breaking of
the phosphoanhydride bonds between these groups (yielding
ADP and inorganic phosphate—Pi—if from ATP) enables the
work that undergirds the full gamut of complex cellular behaviors, ranging from motility and contraction to ion transport,
secretion, and the diverse reactions in cellular signaling. All
these processes are thus reliant on a range of metabolic enzymes
and mitochondrial functions, and the preferred carbon source
utilized for metabolism on a moment-to-moment basis differs
between tissues. In the brain, glucose is most heavily used
(Mergenthaler et al., 2013) while the heart often prioritizes lipid
sources (Goldberg et al., 2012).
Diverse energy buffers are also available, including glycogen
stored in the liver which can be mobilized to generate more
glucose on an as-needed basis. Circulating glucose is taken up
into cells via facilitated diffusion enabled by glucose transporters (GLUTs) and then catabolized through the subsequent
reactions of glycolysis, the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle
(Arnold and Finley, 2023), and oxidative phosphorylation
(Bonora et al., 2012; Fig. 2). The complete oxidation of a single
glucose molecule through these processes is estimated to yield
the formation of around 30 ATP molecules, although this
number varies between sources and may be modified as further
information becomes available (Rich, 2003).
Initially, glycolysis yields two ATP molecules during the
hydrolysis of a glucose molecule to two pyruvates. The latter can
then enter the TCA cycle in the mitochondria after conversion to
the high-energy intermediate acetyl coenzyme A (acetyl-CoA) to
produce the coenzymes nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide
(NADH) and flavin adenine dinucleotide (FADH2), which in turn
act as electron donors for the electron transport chain (ETC) in
Figure 1. An overview of EMS. EMS consists of three key stages (top) for which example inputs and outputs are given for an idealized tissue. This basic
framework can be applied to study EMS in different organ systems, but the molecules underlying initiation and transduction may vary. EMS is first initiated by
metabolic activity which causes a decrease in the availability of extracellular substrates and/or changes in intracellular energy status and an increase in
metabolic byproducts. In the second stage of EMS, this metabolic disturbance is sensed by the local vasculature and rapidly transduced into endothelial cell
membrane hyperpolarization via an increase in K+ channel activity, which will ultimately promote vasodilation and an increase in blood flow. Hyperpolarizing
signals are initiated in capillaries at the nexus of metabolic activity where capillary pericytes and endothelial cells play key roles in this process and are
transmitted either by passive electrotonic spread or by regenerative Kir2.1-mediated signaling upstream to areas of the vasculature covered in contractile cells
(i.e., contractile pericytes or smooth muscle cells). These contractile cells are induced to relax to produce an increase in blood flow, and this final output of EMS
delivers more substrates to the active region and has the effect of reversing the deviations from set-point of the initiating metabolic factors and homeostatically resets local metabolic reserves.
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 2 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
the inner mitochondrial membrane, wherein the flow of electrons through the protein complexes comprising the ETC culminate in the coupling of the electrochemical proton (H+)
gradient to oxidative phosphorylation, generating ATP via the
activity of ATP synthase (Fig. 2). In a system replete with energy
substrates, each mitochondrial ATP synthase produces in excess
of 100 ATP per second through this process, which can be increased to >400 ATP per second under catalytically optimal
conditions (Matsuno-Yagi and Hatefi, 1988). In intact cells, these
processes ultimately maintain a cytoplasmic ATP concentration
in the millimolar range (Greiner and Glonek, 2021), which is
typically several orders of magnitude higher than that of ADP
(free [ADP] in heart tissue has been estimated at 15 µM [Weiss
et al., 1992], in the brain at 12 µM [Roth and Weiner, 1991; Tabula
Muris Consortium, 2020], and in resting skeletal muscle at 6 µM
[Roth and Weiner, 1991]) and orders of magnitude higher still
than that of AMP (estimated at 71 nM in brain and 5 nM in
muscle [Roth and Weiner, 1991], and 250 nM in heart [Airan
et al., 2009]). The TCA cycle is the linkage point for the oxidation of all energy substrates, including fatty acids, lactate, ketone
bodies, and amino acids, which are through various mechanisms
processed to acetyl-CoA, which is then used to produce ATP
through the mechanisms described above (Arnold and Finley,
2023).
Ultimately the substrates and the oxygen (O2) required to
power the ETC are delivered in the blood via the plasma and its
O2-laden red blood cells (RBCs), respectively, which are directed
through the incredibly elaborate vascular networks of all tissues
(Box 1). To avoid deficits in energy supply, substrate delivery via
the blood needs to be matched precisely to the activity levels of
Figure 2. Metabolic cues for EMS. The basic metabolic processes occurring in all cells provide a rich tapestry of potential cues for EMS. Here, the oxidation of
glucose is depicted, showing several potential EMS cues in green. Initially, a substrate is transported into the cell cytoplasm for use. In this example, glucose is
brought in via GLUT transporters and then processed via the 10 reactions of glycolysis to yield two pyruvate molecules and two ATP, along with two NADH.
From here, pyruvate can be fermented to lactate, which can be released from cells via monocarboxylate (MCT) transporters. Alternatively, pyruvate can be
used to produce acetyl-CoA (also producing NADH and CO2 as a byproduct) that can enter the TCA cycle in the mitochondrial matrix. The TCA cycle reduces a
number of NAD+ molecules to NADH and FAD+ to FADH2, while also generating more CO2. The NADH and FADH2 in turn act as electron donors to the ETC in
the inner mitochondrial membrane to generate a proton gradient that ATP synthase (i.e., Complex V) uses to yield large amounts of ATP, which can then be
exported via the adenine nucleotide translocator in exchange for ADP. In addition to the generated CO2, lactate, or glucose levels themselves acting as cues, the
redox state of the cell or the ATP:ADP ratio may also signal to open K+ channels such as KATP to generate membrane hyperpolarization. Either ATP:ADP ratio in
the bulk cytosol or in submembrane regions around response elements could conceivably contribute to this process. The generation of these cues may occur
directly in the working cells of a given tissue such as cardiac myocytes in the heart, or in metabolic sentinel cells such as in pericytes in the brain.
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 3 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
organs and muscle at the most macroscopic levels, all the way
down to that of individual cells, while also being rapidly and
continually modulated to meet fluctuating local energetic needs.
Extensive work has uncovered the molecular mechanisms
through which the contractile state of smooth muscle cells
(SMCs) in arteries and arterioles is regulated to control perfusion (Segal et al., 1989; Segal and Duling, 1989; McCarron and
Halpern, 1990; Brayden and Nelson, 1992; Daut et al., 1994; Knot
and Nelson, 1995, 1998; Little et al., 1995a, 1995b; Nelson et al.,
1995; Bonev and Nelson, 1996; Dora et al., 1997, 2003; Haas and
Duling, 1997; Beach et al., 1998; Edwards et al., 1998; Porter et al.,
1998; Welsh and Segal, 1998; Jaggar et al., 2000; Jaggar, 2001;
Heppner et al., 2002; Ledoux et al., 2008; Xi et al., 2008;
Figueroa and Duling, 2009; Hannah et al., 2011; Mufti et al.,
2010; Takeda et al., 2011; Bagher et al., 2012; Dabertrand et al.,
2012, 2013; Sonkusare et al., 2012, 2014, 2016; Straub et al., 2012,
2014; Tran et al., 2012; Abd El-Rahman et al., 2013; Gonzales
et al., 2014; Harraz et al., 2014; Mercado et al., 2014; Earley
and Brayden, 2015; Sullivan et al., 2015; Wilson et al., 2015;
Garland et al., 2017; McCarron et al., 2017; Tajada et al., 2017; Lee
et al., 2018; Hald and Welsh, 2020; Ottolini et al., 2020;
Mironova et al., 2023), which is governed by control of the
membrane potential and intracellular Ca2+ levels. More recent
work is now revealing the role of the endothelial cells (ECs) of
capillaries and their closely associated pericytes calling for blood
flow increases and in the fine-tuning of the incoming flow of
blood (Beach et al., 1998; McGahren et al., 1998; Hall et al., 2014;
Longden et al., 2017, 2021; Harraz et al., 2018a, 2022; Lamb et al.,
2018; Gonzales et al., 2020; Moshkforoush et al., 2020; Zhao
et al., 2020a; Hartmann et al., 2021; Rosehart et al., 2021;
Thakore et al., 2021; Zambach et al., 2021; Hariharan et al., 2022;
Klug et al., 2023).
The milieu and signaling environments of the various organ
systems differ vastly throughout an organism, and thus the
question arises of how the continuous body-wide arterio–
capillary–venous network correctly integrates the thousands of
data streams arising from the diverse activities of local cells with
its relatively limited toolkit of protein sensors and actuators.
Here, we propose that the solutions to this problem lie in a set of
sophisticated yet generalized signaling mechanisms that ultimately convert increases in local energy demand into electrical
signaling throughout the vasculature and take center stage in
matching blood flow to metabolic needs in all tissues—a process
we refer to as electro-metabolic signaling or EMS (Fig. 1). We
outline this concept in detail and provide examples which we have
elucidated in the brain and the heart, along with key experimental
hallmarks that can be used to implicate this process in other tissues. We explore possibilities for the breakdown of EMS, which
may play an important role in a wide range of disease contexts
that involve mismatches between energy supply and demand, and
we detail the essential questions that need to be addressed to build
a complete view of the mechanistic landscape of EMS.
KATP channels are the key EMS transducers linking the cellular
metabolic state to an electrical signal
Central to EMS is the conversion of metabolic information
into electrical information that can be propagated through the
“wires” of the vasculature, and ATP-sensitive potassium (K+;
KATP) channels are uniquely suited to perform this task. Accordingly, we review below the key biophysical features of these
transducers, with a central focus on the vascular isoform of this
channel which makes an important contribution to EMS in the
brain, before discussing mechanisms through which KATP
channels may be engaged in response to changing the metabolic
state of the tissue.
KATP channels lie at the center of the EMS signaling network
and serve as the primary transducer that ties the internal cellular metabolic state to the membrane potential. These channels
thus can convert changes in the local metabolic environment
into electrical messages that can be transmitted over long distances (typically with the aid of Kir2.1 channels, as detailed
below) to the contractile cells of the vasculature (i.e., SMCs, and
the contractile pericytes of the proximal regions of the capillary
bed; Box 1).
The pore-forming subunits of KATP channels are members of
the Kir channel family (Inagaki et al., 1995; Hibino et al., 2010).
Currents through this family of channels depend on the driving
force for K+ (i.e., membrane potential [Em] minus EK). Accordingly, when Em is experimentally held at voltages negative to EK
(which does not occur under physiological conditions), Kir
channels conduct large, ohmic inward currents, but when Em is
positive to EK (as in healthy physiological conditions), outward
currents with varying degrees of inward rectification are
observed according to the channel subtype, causing the current–
voltage relationship to deviate from ohmic linearity. Rectification ranges from strong, in which only a small amount of current
flows from the interior of the cell to the exterior at potentials
positive to EK—as is the case for Kir2.1 channels which feature
prominently in electrical conduction, described below—to weak,
where rectification begins only at very positive potentials, tens
of millivolts from EK, as is the case for KATP channels (Hibino
et al., 2010).
The weakly rectifying current–voltage profile of KATP channels results mainly from intracellular Mg2+ block at positive
potentials (more positive than approximately −20 mV [Horie
et al., 1987]). The key property of these channels is that they
operate as exquisite molecular transducers coupling complex
changes in intracellular energy state to membrane electrical
activity. This stems from the unique sensitivity of KATP channels
to the ratio of intracellular ATP to ADP, being initially named for
the fact that when ATP levels increase, their K+ conductance is
inhibited (Noma, 1983). The basic structure of a functional KATP
channel is a hetero–octameric complex composed of four Kir6.x
subunits (either Kir6.1 or Kir6.2, encoded by KCNJ8 and KCNJ11,
respectively) and four sulphonyl urea receptor (SUR) subunits
(SUR1 or SUR2, encoded by ABCC8 or ABCC9, respectively;
Clement et al., 1997; Inagaki et al., 1997; Shyng and Nichols,
1997). Different Kir6.x/SURx subunit combinations create KATP
channels with differing nucleotide sensitivities and biophysical
characteristics. The resultant diversity of KATP channels are
widely expressed in cardiac myocytes (Noma, 1983), pancreatic
β-cells (Cook and Hales, 1984), skeletal muscle (Spruce et al., 1985),
neurons (Liss and Roeper, 2001; Ballanyi, 2004; Mart´ınez-François
et al., 2018), as well as vascular smooth muscle (Standen et al., 1989;
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 4 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
Beech et al., 1993; Sancho et al., 2022), endothelial cells (ECs; Aziz
et al., 2017; Sancho et al., 2022), and pericytes (He et al., 2018;
Vanlandewijck et al., 2018; Hariharan et al., 2020, 2022; Sancho
et al., 2022).
Box 1. Vascular organization and cell types
The vasculature is broadly segmented into arteries/arterioles, capillaries, and venules/veins, which coordinate distinct aspects of blood delivery. Arteries and
arterioles are composed of an inner lining of endothelial cells (ECs) that directly interface with the blood to convert luminal signals into a form that can be integrated by the overlying smooth muscle cells (SMCs; Fig. B1). The latter are the key contractile cells that, through actin–myosin crossbridge cycling, determine the
diameter of the lumen and thus the flow of blood flow into the capillaries. Control of SMC membrane potential and intracellular Ca2+ are central to this process.
Figure B1. Vascular organization and cell types. (A) Scanning electron micrograph (SEM) of a bifurcating arteriole covered in contractile smooth muscle
cells (SMCs; individual cells denoted in orange). Scale bar: 50 µm. (B) SEM of a contractile pericyte and its processes (pink) enwrapping a capillary. Note the
clear distinction from SMC morphology. Scale bar: 11.5 µm. A and B adapted with permission from Rodriguez-Baeza et al. (1998). (C) SEM of brain capillaries
showing the sequential branch ordering of vessels up to the fifth order (green). Note this system is not perfect, as some anastomosing vessels could be labeled
as two distinct orders (*). Scale bar: 50 µm. Adapted with permission from Krucker et al. (2006). (D) SEM of the choroid vasculature showing lobular vascular
architecture which makes it impossible to accurately assign branch orders (e.g., green vessels). 65× magnification. Adapted with permission from Miodonski ´
and Jasinski (1979) ´ .
In a number of vascular beds, capillaries are typically referred to by “branch order” in which the final SMC-covered arteriole is taken as the zero-order vessel,
and the initial capillary emanating from this is the first-order capillary. From here, branch numbering increases sequentially each time the capillaries branch,
regardless of vessel orientation or diameter. However, this classification system is difficult to apply in vascular beds in which the capillaries are highly anastomosing, such as heart, where this hierarchical ordering quickly breaks down by dint of the many reciprocal connections between adjacent capillaries (Longden
et al., 2023; Fig. B1). The capillaries are composed of exceptionally thin (∼100 nm) ECs that wrap around themselves once to form a lumen just wide enough to
allow RBCs to squeeze through in single file, experiencing significant mechanical forces as they go, and are covered by the cell bodies and processes of a range of
pericytes.
Using the brain as an example, at least three pericyte subtypes have been distinguished based on their locations in the capillary bed, their relative expression
of α-smooth muscle actin (α-SMA), and the appearance of their processes, designated ensheathing (or contractile) pericytes, mesh pericytes, and thin-strand
pericytes (Grant et al., 2019; Gonzales et al., 2020; Hariharan et al., 2020; Ratelade et al., 2020). Contractile pericytes (Fig. B1) cover the majority of the
parenchyma-facing surface of the first to approximately the fourth-order capillary ECs found immediately downstream of SMC-enwrapped penetrating arterioles
and heavily express α-SMA but have a distinct morphology to SMCs. Mesh pericytes are found immediately adjacent to the last contractile pericytes of a given
capillary offshoot and exhibit intermediate levels of vessel coverage and are α-SMA-negative. Finally, thin-strand pericyte (Hariharan et al., 2020) coverage begins
at approximately fifth-order branches and continues until the capillaries merge with the venular system (Grant et al., 2019). Each thin-strand pericyte has a unique
domain of extensive, exquisitely fine processes that stretch along the capillary surface for up to ∼300 µm (Berthiaume et al., 2018). Compared with contractile
pericytes, thin-strand pericytes express very low levels of α-SMA (Alarcon-Martinez et al., 2018; Vanlandewijck et al., 2018), suggesting that their contributions to
blood flow control mechanistically, in contrast with the rapid and dynamic regulation of the diameter of the underlying capillary orchestrated by their upstream
contractile counterparts (Hill et al., 2015; Gonzales et al., 2020; Zambach et al., 2021). Indeed, recently, the contractile abilities of thin-strand pericytes were
explored using optogenetic actuators and were revealed to be comparatively slower and smaller in magnitude, yet still capable of exerting a significant influence on
blood flow (Hartmann et al., 2021). Detailed studies of pericyte morphology and organization in other tissues are currently awaiting investigators’ attention.
RBCs transit the capillary bed, releasing their oxygen to the tissue as they go and are accompanied by nutrient-rich plasma from which energy substrates are
extracted and these are drained back toward the heart for recirculation initially in small venules and then in larger veins. The veins consist of the same components
as the arterioles, but here the smooth muscle is disorganized and non-contractile (Hill et al., 2015), and as such, these vessels do not substantially change their
diameter. In most tissues, luminal valves prevent the backflow of blood and pooling but these are absent from the brain where gravity assists drainage.
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 5 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
The most well-studied KATP isotype in pancreatic β-cells is
formed by Kir6.2 and SUR1 subunits (Noma, 1983; Inagaki et al.,
1995). In contrast, the “vascular” form of the KATP channel found
in SMCs, ECs, and pericytes is formed from Kir6.1 and SUR2
(Nelson and Quayle, 1995; Seino and Miki, 2003; He et al., 2018;
Vanlandewijck et al., 2018). SUR2 undergoes a range of alternative splicing events (Chutkow et al., 1999), which modulate
the nucleotide-binding properties and pharmacology of the
channel in its final form (Reimann et al., 2000). The variant
known as SUR2B, resulting from the excision of the final 129
coding base pairs plus 48 from the 39 untranslated region, is
thought to be the predominant isoform found in the vasculature
(Chutkow et al., 1999). In the heart, a combination of Kir6.2/
SUR2A gives rise to KATP channels that have distinct properties
from those in the vasculature and other locations. A number of
recent studies have solved the structures of several KATP channel
types at high-resolution by leveraging advances in single particle
cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM; Cheng, 2015; Cheng et al.,
2015), including a hamster SUR1–mouse/rat Kir6.2 hybrid complex and a human SUR1–Kir6.2 complex in both closed and open
states (Lee et al., 2017; Li et al., 2017; Martin et al., 2017; Zhao and
Mackinnon, 2021). Recently, Sung et al. (2021) provided the first
cryo-EM structures for the vascular Kir6.1/SUR2B KATP channel
in the presence of ATP and bound by the inhibitory compound
glibenclamide. This study determined that the architecture of the
vascular isoform of the channel exhibits key structural and
conformational features that are not observed in pancreatic KATP
channels prepared under similar conditions (Martin et al., 2017;
Wu et al., 2018), such as a displaced cytoplasmic domain as detailed below, which may confer distinct properties at the functional level that influence how these different channel subtypes
contribute to EMS.
Both Kir6.1 and Kir6.2 subunits are composed of two transmembrane helices bridged by an extracellular loop, which in
tetrameric assemblies generates the narrow portion of the pore
that comprises the highly conserved K+ selectivity filter, accompanied by cytoplasmic N- and C-terminal domains (Nichols,
2006). The hallmark feature of KATP channels is their regulation
of Em in response to changes in intracellular nucleotide concentrations (Table 1), which bind at several locations throughout
the channel complex. Micromolar ATP inhibits KATP channels
through a direct interaction with the Kir6.x subunit. Residues
R50 and K185 are essential for this ATP inhibition in Kir6.2, and
these positive charges are conserved at equivalent positions in
Kir6.1, but absent in most other ATP-insensitive Kir family
members (Trapp et al., 2003).
Because cytosolic intracellular ATP concentration is relatively high under physiological conditions, typically in the range
of 1–2 mM in SMCs (Larcombe-McDouall et al., 1999; Gribble
et al., 2000) and 5–10 mM in cardiac myocytes (Greiner and
Glonek, 2021), this can exert a powerful suppressive influence
on basal channel activity and is counterbalanced by the influences of other interacting molecules and signaling modifications
outlined below (Huang et al., 2019). Kir6.2 variants typically
exhibit higher free ATP sensitivity than Kir6.1-containing
channels (Table 1), and the recent structure provided by Sung
and colleagues reveals subtle differences that may contribute to
this distinction. In Kir6.1-containing channels, the cytoplasmic
domain of the pore-forming subunit is oriented ∼5.8 A further ˚
away from the membrane and rotated counterclockwise relative
to its Kir6.2 counterpart, allowing for fewer close residue interactions with ATP than are seen in the Kir6.2 ATP binding site.
This <1 nm difference in cytoplasmic domain positioning is thus
a possible contributory factor to the lower ATP sensitivity of the
vascular KATP isoform (Yamada et al., 1997; Satoh et al., 1998).
The large accompanying SUR subunits are members of the
ATP-binding cassette (ABC) membrane protein family and have
17 TM regions (Fig. 3). These regions are grouped into three
transmembrane domains: TMD0 (comprising TM1–TM5), TMD1
(TM6–TM11), and TMD2 (TM12–TM17). TMD0 is bound to the
channel α subunit via a bridging cytosolic loop referred to as L0,
which plays a crucial role in channel gating and activity, likely
by transmitting signals to the pore-forming subunit through
conformational rearrangements (Babenko and Bryan, 2003;
Masia et al., 2007; McClenaghan et al., 2018). Each SUR subunit
contains two nucleotide-binding domains (NBDs): one between
TMD1 and TMD2 (termed NBD1) and another in the C-terminus
following TMD2 (termed NBD2; Hibino et al., 2010; Lee et al.,
2017; Li et al., 2017; Martin et al., 2017). These NBDs are key sites
for nucleotide regulation and allow the interactions of magnesium (Mg2+)-bound adenosine diphosphate (Mg-ADP) and
Mg-ATP (as well as other Mg-nucleotides) to produce a key
stimulatory effect on KATP channel activity through NBD dimerization resulting in channel opening. Here, Mg-ATP binding
to NBD1 in conjunction with Mg-ADP binding to NBD2 promotes
dimerization, which leads to channel opening through conformational changes mediated via a structural element connecting
NBD1 to TMD2 known as the N1–T2 linker. At its C-terminal end,
this linker contains 15 glutamate/aspartate residues, forming a
region known as the ED domain. Molecular dynamics analyses
suggest that when MgADP is absent, electrostatic interaction
between NBD2 and the Kir6.1 cytoplasmic domain acts as an
autoinhibitory motif, preventing NBD2 dimerization with NBD1
and avoiding unregulated activation—consistent with low
spontaneous activity observed for the vascular form of KATP
channels (Fujita and Kurachi, 2000). The binding of MgADP to
NBD2 alters the shape of the ED domain, a reorganization that
allows the rotation of NBD2 toward NBD1 and thus promotes
dimerization and the transmission of a conformational change
that opens the channel.
A striking difference between the cardiac and vascular forms
of the KATP channel lies in the contrasting sensitivities of
channel activity to the membrane phospholipid phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate (PIP2). In Kir6.2-containing KATP
channels (Hilgemann and Ball, 1996; Baukrowitz et al., 1998), the
presence of PIP2 decreases the affinity of the channel for ATP
>100-fold and dramatically increases channel open probability
in the absence of nucleotides (Shyng and Nichols, 1998). In
contrast, the Kir6.1 form of the channel possesses a higher affinity for PIP2, with PIP2 binding so tightly as to render channel
activity insensitive to physiological fluctuations of this lipid, and
it has thus been suggested that this higher affinity may underlie
the more stable openings characteristic of vascular KATP channels (MacGregor et al., 2002; Quinn et al., 2003). In the context
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 6 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
of EMS, these observations collectively suggest that the mechanisms that engage KATP channels in cells expressing Kir6.2-
containing KATP channels, such as cardiac myocytes, may differ
from Kir6.1-expressing vascular cells. Indeed in the heart, with
its exceptionally high intracellular ATP levels (∼5–10 mM
[Greiner and Glonek, 2021]), modulation of membrane PIP2
levels might play an important role in creating the conditions for
KATP channel engagement. In the vasculature, by contrast, PIP2
concentration-related contributions are much less likely, and it
may be that changes in ATP:ADP ratio come to the fore in this
instance, or that other modulatory events such as coincident
channel phosphorylation are important for KATP activation.
In this vein, a stimulatory effect of protein kinase A (PKA)
has been observed for the activity of Kir6.1-containing channels.
PKA is activated by membrane Gs-coupled GPCRs that convert
ATP into cyclic AMP via adenylyl cyclase, which in turn promotes PKA engagement. PKA phosphorylation of multiple sites
(Ser-1351, Ser-1387) on the pore-forming and regulatory subunits of the KATP channel is known to produce a profound increase in channel open probability (Shi et al., 2007). Similarly,
PKG promotes KATP activation in the neuronal (Kir6.2/SUR1) and
cardiac (Kir6.2/SUR2A) forms of the channel (Han et al., 2001;
Chai and Lin, 2010; Chai et al., 2011), and vascular (Kir6.1/
SUR2B) KATP channels can also be engaged to generate membrane hyperpolarization by stimuli activating guanylyl cyclasecGMP signaling (Kubo et al., 1994; Murphy and Brayden, 1995),
which acts through PKG. In contrast, several consensus protein
kinase C (PKC) sites in the distal C-terminus of Kir6.1 have been
identified that mediate KATP inhibition. PKC is activated downstream of diacylglycerol (DAG), which is produced as a result of
GqPCR engagement and PIP2 hydrolysis. Therefore, activation of
any of the plethora of GqPCRs that are expressed in pericytes
(Hariharan et al., 2020) or cardiac myocytes (Litvinukov ˇ a et al., ´
2020) and other tissues is predicted to inhibit KATP channel
activity in the cell. When the serine residues that are the targets
of PKC phosphorylation (Ser-354, Ser-379, Ser-385, Ser-391, and
Ser-397) are mutated individually, moderate reductions in PKC
inhibition are observed, whereas combined mutation of these
residues produces greater effects, implying that the degree of
phosphorylation of KATP channels by PKC produces a graded
inhibition (Shi et al., 2008), allowing fine-tuning of activity.
In addition to these canonical signaling events, a number of
other modifications are known to affect KATP channel trafficking
and activity, including glycosylation (Conti et al., 2002), nitrosylation (Kawano et al., 2009), myristoylation (Lu et al., 2006),
and palmitoylation (Yang et al., 2020). Combined, these modes
of KATP regulation represent a rich and diverse molecular toolkit
for modifying KATP channel activity and density to influence the
membrane potential of the cell in response to a range of extracellular signals and across broad spatiotemporal domains.
Kir2 channels are central to transmission of electrical signals
Strong inward-rectifier K+ channels of the Kir2 family are
widely expressed and in the vasculature are functionally expressed in the plasma membranes of capillary (Longden et al.,
2017; Harraz et al., 2018a, 2018b) and arteriolar (Ahn et al., 2017;
Sonkusare et al., 2016) ECs and in SMCs (Longden et al., 2014;
Sonkusare et al., 2016). Three Kir2 channel subtypes (Kir2.1–2.3,
encoded by KCNJ2, KCNJ12, and KCNJ4) have been identified and
share similar structural and biophysical features, including their
near complete block by intracellular Mg2+ and polyamines as Vm
is progressively depolarized from EK, and sensitivity to blockade
by external barium (Ba2+) ions (Hibino et al., 2010). The crystal
structure of Kir2.2 (Tao et al., 2009) and more recently a cryoEM structure of Kir2.1 (Fernandes et al., 2022) have been solved,
revealing stunning details of these channels (Fig. 3).
Similar to the pore-forming region of the KATP channels described above, Kir2 channels are formed of tetramers of α
Table 1. Nucleotide and phosphoinositide regulation of KATP channel subtypes
Tissue location
(cell type)a
Subunit
config.
ATP inhibition
(IC50)
MgATP regulation
(EC50/IC50; µM)
MgADP activation
(EC50; µM)
PIP2 affinity
(ΔΔG; kJ/mol)
Refs
Pancreas (β cell) Kir6.2/SUR1 10–20 112–124b 8–11 38 Proks et al. (2010), (2014), Foster and
Coetzee (2016), Pipatpolkai et al. (2020)
Heart (cardiac
myocyte)
Kir6.2/SUR2A 21–100 541b 18 n.d.d Aguilar-Bryan and Bryan (1999),
Tammaro and Ashcroft (2007),
Pratt et al. (2012), Proks et al. (2014),
Foster and Coetzee (2016),
Pipatpolkai et al. (2020)
Vasculature
(smooth muscle)
Kir6.1/SUR2B 29–200 n.d.b 96c n.d.e Davies et al. (2010), Foster and
Coetzee (2016)
a
Note the possibility for a range of KATP isoforms to be expressed in an individual tissue, and that the listed isoforms may be found in other tissues, for example,
the “pancreatic” Kir6.2/SUR1 form of the channel is also found in neurons. b
Italicized text denotes IC50 values. Note that mutant channels (Kir6.2-G334D, Kir6.2-F333I) with reduced ATP sensitivity were used to reveal MgATP
sensitivities, as the effects of MgATP are normally strongly masked by inhibitory effects of free ATP. Similar mutants are needed to study MgATP regulation of
Kir6.1 containing channels in detail.
c
Measured in the presence of 10 µM pinacidil.
dLikely similar to Kir6.2/SUR1, above, as PIP2 binding free energy for Kir6.2 alone is 33 kJ/mol. e
Likely higher than for Kir6.1, as inferred from indirect measures in Quinn et al. (2003).
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 7 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
subunits, each of which has two transmembrane helices (termed
M1 and M2) that are connected via pore-forming loops and intracellular N- and C-termini and lack any accompanying accessory subunits (Fig. 3). The interaction of these channels with
PIP2 is critical for their activity, and readers are referred to
extensive discussion of PIP2 as a key modulator of ion channel
activity in elegant recent works for more detail (Hille et al., 2015;
Harraz et al., 2020). PIP2 binds to the Kir2.1 channel with a KD of
∼3 µM, and it has been proposed that such binding leads to a
conformational change in a conserved 15 amino-acid cytoplasmic motif known as the “G-loop” that leads to channel gating
(Fernandes et al., 2022).
Figure 3. K+ channels at the heart of EMS. (A) Topographic depiction of vascular KATP channel composition showing a two-transmembrane Kir6.1 subunit
alongside its much larger companion 17-transmembrane SUR2B. (B) Side-on cryo-EM density map of the vascular KATP channel in the presence of the inhibitor
glibenclamide. (C) Structural model of the data shown in B, showing the locations of the glibenclamide binding site (Glib), SUR nucleotide-binding domains
(NBDs), ATP binding sites (ATP), and the L0 linker, as well as several transmembrane domains (TMDs). (D) Top-down view of the channel as seen from the
extracellular side. (A–D) Modified with permission from Sung et al. (2021). (E) Side-on (left), top-down (upper right), and bottom-up (lower right) cryo-EM
density maps of the Kir2.1 channel at 4.3 A resolution. ˚ (F) Model of the data in E shows key structural features. K+ ions and blocking strontium ions (which
mimic Mg2+ ions) are shown in the pore in magenta and green, respectively. (G) Top-down model of the channel seen from the extracellular side showing
chains comprising the transmembrane domains in blue and disulfide bridges between subunits in red. (E–G) Modified with permission from Fernandes et al.
(2022).
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 8 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
The other major interaction of Kir2 channels that is essential
for understanding their function is their intracellular block by
polyamines and Mg2+ ions which underlies their strongly rectifying behavior. This has been attributed to two negatively
charged regions of the pore around residue D172 in the M2 helix
(Lu and MacKinnon, 1994) and the E224 and E299 residues close
to the G-loop (Kubo and Murata, 2001). The rings of negative
charge that these residues impart to the channel pore attract
positively charged blocking particles, which in turn is thought to
impair K+ permeation by hindering ion access to the selectivity
filter (Fernandes et al., 2022). As this blockade by polyamines
and Mg2+ depends on voltage, it can as a matter of course be
relived through membrane hyperpolarization toward EK. Hyperpolarization progressively lowers the probability that the
pore is occluded and thereby permits K+ exit from the cell down
the electrochemical gradient to generate outward hyperpolarizing K+ currents. Accordingly, there is a self-amplifying
effect inherent to Kir currents wherein the outward currents
permitted by hyperpolarization generate further hyperpolarization and thereby promote further relief of voltage-dependent
channel blockade (Longden and Nelson, 2015). A similar effect
can be achieved through the elevation of external K+, which
causes a rightward shift in the current–voltage profile of the
channel. In the context of the vasculature, where resting Vm is
between −30 and −40 mV, this rightward shift allows for relief of
the voltage-dependent block of the channel by promoting the
relief of the channel block at these potentials. We and others
have extensively reviewed the biophysical properties of Kir2
channels, and thus readers are directed to these articles for
further information on these topics (Hibino et al., 2010; Longden
and Nelson, 2015).
We argue below that the outward currents through Kir2
channels generated by membrane hyperpolarization, alongside
their K+ sensitivity, are critical for signal transmission from
capillaries during EMS.
The hallmarks of EMS
At its core, the input–output pattern of EMS is reflected in the
conversion of the level of local metabolic demand in a tissue into
electrical signaling throughout the vasculature (Fig. 1). Below,
we discuss three key stages that define this phenomenon: (1) the
generation of metabolic signals and the array of possible forms
they may take; (2) the sensing and transduction mechanisms that
generate vascular electrical signals, along with the propagation
mechanisms for these signals from capillaries to arterioles; and
(3) the homeostatic adjustment of blood flow to deliver energy
substrates to satisfy local metabolic needs.
Stage I: Elevated metabolic activity is the initiating input to EMS
The first hallmark of EMS is that it is driven by an elevation of
metabolic demand in the tissue (Fig. 1). This naturally results in
an array of complex intra- and extracellular modifications which
may act as triggering factors to initiate the adaptive blood flow
changes provided by EMS. Given the wide range of potential
energy sources and the enormous complexity of the cell’s metabolic pathways, there exists a vast array of biochemical signatures that could act as the initiation event for EMS in different
tissues. Here, we focus our discussion on currently known EMS
signals and exciting unexplored possibilities.
Decreased substrate availability as an EMS trigger. Perhaps
operating most directly as an initiating factor, a decrease in local
energy substrate availability due to uptake or depletion during
activity may act as a primary driver of EMS. Indeed, we recently
demonstrated that this is the case for brain glucose, where
capillary pericytes sense and respond to local glucose availability
(Hariharan et al., 2022), and similar mechanisms may exist for
other energy substrates.
Many cells express glucose transporters (GLUTs) to directly
take up glucose from their environment. GLUTs are facilitative
transporters that utilize the gradient of glucose to direct it to
locations of relatively low concentration and have varying kinetics and affinities which can be modulated by intracellular
signaling pathways, such that glucose uptake can be modified in
an activity-dependent manner (Thorens and Mueckler, 2010).
For example, the membrane density of GLUT4 proteins can be
rapidly adjusted in response to signaling events. In muscle and
fat cells, GLUT4 is under the direct control of insulin signaling,
the elevation of which results in rapid membrane insertion of
reserve pools of this transporter stored in submembrane vesicles, thereby rapidly augmenting the glucose import capacity of
the cell (Stockli et al., 2011 ¨ ). Increasing glucose import via such
mechanisms can lead to an increase in the breakdown and oxidation of glucose by active cells, and this can in turn rapidly
change local external glucose concentrations.
Brain regional glucose has been observed to fall ∼30% from
its resting level of ∼1 mM during a maze task (McNay et al.,
2001), presumably due to its rapid uptake by neurons
(Lundgaard et al., 2015; Li et al., 2023) or local astrocytes
(Pellerin and Magistretti, 1994; Rouach et al., 2008), with onset
on the order of seconds (Gold and Korol, 2012). Interestingly, in
aged animals, depletion of local glucose during the same task is
even more extreme, reaching a nadir of ∼50% below resting
levels during task performance (McNay and Gold, 2001), which
could further increase metabolic strain on highly active neurons.
In younger animals, the drop in glucose is typically sustained for
some time during task performance and then corrected back to
baseline levels (McNay et al., 2001), suggesting perhaps that the
initial dearth of glucose could act as a signal to the vasculature to
indicate local metabolic activation and prompt the initiation of
EMS to correct the supply deficit.
Tight control of local glucose is essential in the brain, which
operates as an on-demand system relying almost exclusively on
incoming glucose transported across the blood–brain barrier by
the heavily expressed GLUTs, in particular the GLUT1 isoform
(Deng et al., 2014), located in the endothelium and astrocytic
endfeet (Mergenthaler et al., 2013). A prevailing view is that
glucose is taken up into astrocytic endfeet during neuronal activity via GLUT1 transporters prompted by glutamatergic signaling and glutamate uptake at the tripartite synapse, and this
promotes glycolysis leading to the generation of pyruvate. This
generated pyruvate is then converted to lactate (by lactate dehydrogenase [LDH] 5) in astrocytes, which is passed via monocarboxylate transporters (MCTs 4 and 1) into the extracellular
space, and MCT2 on neurons then permits its uptake into these
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 9 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
cells. It is suggested that the lactate accumulated in neurons is
then converted by resident LDH1 into pyruvate which can enter
the TCA cycle to ultimately generate ATP via oxidative phosphorylation (Mergenthaler et al., 2013). This mechanism has
been termed the astrocyte-neuron lactate shuttle (ANLS).
However, recent studies have questioned the extent to which
neurons depend on astrocytes to provide lactate as a fuel via this
mechanism, as opposed to taking up glucose directly from their
immediate environment and processing this with their own
metabolic machinery (Chuquet et al., 2010; Lundgaard et al.,
2015). Indeed, GLUT3, which has a higher glucose transport
rate than GLUT1 (Simpson et al., 2008), is expressed by neurons
to enable their direct uptake of glucose from the surrounding
parenchyma, and this has led to a counterview in which neurons
process their own glucose for glycolysis and oxidative phosphorylation (Patel et al., 2014; Lundgaard et al., 2015; Peng et al.,
2021), in the process releasing lactate into the extracellular space
(Dienel, 2012). Further work is needed to establish exactly how
glucose is handled by these two cell types.
The brain also maintains a diminutive reservoir of glycogen
(Choi and Gruetter, 2003; Oz et al., 2003 ¨ , 2015; DiNuzzo, 2019),
which accounts for a low percentage of total glucose metabolism
during normal operations and is at least 20 times smaller than
reserves stored in muscle, and 50–100 times lower than that
sequestered in the liver (Ö
z et al., 2007; Obel et al., 2012). Thus,
while the brain appears to depend directly on local glucose on an
as-needed basis, in systems with significant glycogen reserves
these may be mobilized as glucose levels fall to provide sustained
buffering for energy production, and thus EMS may turn on
over a longer and more gradual time scale or may depend on
other triggering factors.
Intriguingly, several GLUT isoforms are expressed directly in
SMCs and pericytes, including transcripts for GLUT1, GLUT3,
and GLUT4 (He et al., 2018; Vanlandewijck et al., 2018). The
relative activity of these transporters could influence the sensitivity of EMS mechanisms embedded in the vasculature. For
example, if GLUT4 transporters are active in the membrane as
opposed to sequestered in reserve pools this could reduce the
sensitivity of vascular EMS mechanisms to glucose fluctuations
by maintaining higher intracellular ATP levels. These possibilities for tuning EMS and their consequences for blood flow
control are intriguing avenues for future investigation.
Cytosolic ATP as a driver of EMS. The major mechanism
through which the energy substrates that are taken into a cell
are converted into ATP is mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation. This process will set the bulk ATP level in the cytosol,
which is typically within the millimolar range, as noted above.
Although many mechanisms exist to protect and maintain cytosolic ATP concentrations, it is possible that subtle fluctuations
in bulk ATP could drive EMS via KATP channel activity.
The organization, function, and regulation of KATP channels
are likely to reflect the EMS mechanisms deployed by a given
cell type. At one extreme are the cardiac ventricular myocytes,
wherein the KATP channel density is extremely high (∼10
channels/µm2
, corresponding to around 50,000 channels per
cell; Nichols and Lederer, 1990). This high expression of the
KATP channel is appropriate for the 5–10 mM cytosolic ATP
concentration estimated from NMR data (Greiner and Glonek,
2021) when considered alongside the low IC50 for ATP at the
cardiac isoform of the KATP channel (∼21–100 µM; Table 1; Foster
and Coetzee, 2016). Having thousands of KATP channels in the
membrane will increase sensitivity to small dips in ATP, which
will likely increase their open probability only marginally. Given
the large single channel current (∼80 pS; Foster and Coetzee,
2016), a single channel opening is capable of deflecting the
membrane potential substantially, and thus this could thus
tightly couple small changes in ATP to EMS mechanisms in
the heart.
Similar measurements are needed to inform our understanding of the possibilities for KATP channel control throughout
the vasculature in pericytes, SMCs, and ECs (and of course also
in other cell types expressing KATP channels), as channel membrane density and intracellular ATP levels and dynamics are
thought to be key parameters that contribute to EMS control
mechanisms. For example, at the opposite extreme to cardiac
myocytes would be a small cell working as a metabolic sentinel to
influence local blood flow by directly modulating electrical activity in the vascular system, like capillary pericytes in the
brain (Hariharan et al., 2022). Such cells would benefit from
having local intracellular machinery to make and control ATP
directly around the channel in a submembrane region of
the cell. Very tight coupling between extracellular substrate
availability and submembrane ATP would thereby allow tight
and responsive control of the KATP channel to rapidly produce
hyperpolarizing electrical signals, a concept we explore in more
detail below.
Glycolytic-KATP channel complexes: Potential EMS signaling
microdomains responding to localized changes intracellular energy
status. Upon entering the cell cytosol glucose is broken down
via a series of 10 enzymatic reactions to produce ATP, pyruvate,
and NADH. Intriguingly, a range of glycolytic enzymes, including aldolase A, pyruvate kinase, triosephosphate isomerase, and
glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) have been
found to be physically associated with KATP channels in cardiac
membranes in studies using a combination of two-hybrid
screening, GST pulldown and immunoprecipitation (DharChowdhury et al., 2005; Jovanovic et al., 2005 ´ ; Hong et al.,
2011). More recently, a glycolytic metabolon regulating the
KATP channel has been described in pancreatic membranes
(Ho et al., 2023). These close associations may provide a
direct means through which highly localized metabolism of
glucose in the submembrane environment could be directly
coupled to KATP activity.
Such local organization to enable compartmentalized communication could be critically important for tight control of KATP
activity, as even during vigorous activity global ATP levels are
closely safeguarded (Balaban, 1986) and thus the global concentration change in a typical cell is minimal. Many intracellular
homeostatic mechanisms have evolved to preserve this high
concentration of available intracellular ATP. Examples abound:
creatine kinase, found in skeletal and heart muscle, in the brain,
and in the mitochondria of various tissues, plays an important
role in producing creatine-phosphate when ATP demands are
low, which acts as an immediately available energy reservoir
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 10 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
that can be drawn upon to generate ATP from ADP during periods of intense work (Yaniv et al., 2010; Metallo and Vander
Heiden, 2013); phosphofructokinase-1 (PFK-1), a rate-limiting
enzyme that performs the third reaction in the glycolytic
chain (Jenkins et al., 2011), is allosterically controlled—when
ATP is replete, PFK-1 is inhibited, but as energy availability falls
within the cell and ADP and AMP levels rise its activity is promoted with the effect of buffering ATP levels by modulating
glycolytic rate which can be tuned over a 100-fold range (Voet
et al., 2016). There are many further examples of regulatory
processes that operate to protect ATP availability, and as such it
is unlikely that a decrease in intracellular ATP per se operates
widely as a trigger of EMS mechanisms. (Although, note the
example of the high density of KATP channels in cardiac membranes in the preceding section, which offers a simple emergent
solution to the problem of sensing subtle changes in ATP.)
As intracellular ADP and AMP levels are typically several
orders of magnitude below ATP in a cell at rest, their relative
variance is much more dramatic during cellular activity. Indeed,
as working muscle ramps its ATP turnover rate, ADP levels have
been estimated to increase as much as fivefold (Allen et al., 1997)
and AMP levels even more so (McConell et al., 2020). The
combination of relatively stable ATP levels as a backdrop against
substantial relative changes in ADP thus decreases the ATP:ADP
ratio—a key intracellular energy parameter that influences a
wide range of intracellular metabolic activities which may be
more likely to be a key EMS cue. Recently, the development
of a highly sensitive reporter of ATP:ADP ratio, PercevalHR
(Tantama et al., 2013), has allowed for the first single-cell resolution observations of changes in this metabolic indicator. Intriguingly, this sensor revealed that decreases in external
glucose around neurons within the physiological range result in
a substantial decrease in ATP:ADP ratio. Electrical activity was
also directly linked to changes in ratio, and these were directly
linked to hyperpolarization of the membrane through the engagement of KATP channels (Tantama et al., 2013). As such,
activity-induced changes in ATP:ADP ratio primarily resulting
from relative changes in ADP concentrations likely represent a
more labile metabolic parameter than bulk ATP that can be
rapidly converted into robust electrical activity in cells expressing KATP channels, which could be a central trigger for
blood flow increases in EMS. In vascular cells expressing KATP
for example, it is anticipated that the ATP:ADP ratio will tilt in
favor of channel activation (i.e., higher ADP, lower ATP) during
local substrate depletion in the tissue to generate electrical signals and promote hyperemia.
Returning to the observation that KATP channels physically
associate with glycolytic machinery, the substrates of aldolase
and pyruvate kinase were both shown to suppress KATP channel
activity in excised membrane patches (Hong et al., 2011), and
these observations are buttressed by similar findings in vesicles
containing KATP channels derived from small intestine epithelial
cells (Dubinsky et al., 1998). It thus follows that the glycolytic
machinery of the cell may constitute part of a macromolecular
signaling complex organized around KATP channels that tightly
regulates their activity. A decrease in glycolysis could trigger a
rapid increase in microdomain ADP around the channel (and
potentially a fall in submembrane ATP), which could increase
KATP activity. Accordingly, the KATP channel in certain situations
may be set up to sense a functionally compartmentalized ATP:
ADP ratio in the submembrane region around the channel, as
opposed to that of the bulk cytoplasm. Such a privileged environment would presumably serve to amplify subtle changes in
metabolism and enable the KATP channel to be rapidly responsive. A number of studies also suggest that the sodium/potassium (Na+/K+) ATPase is associated with this membrane complex
of glycolytic enzymes and KATP channels, which may add a further dimension to this organization (Urbach et al., 1996; Schultz,
1997; Dubinsky et al., 1998; Sepp et al., 2014): ATP from microdomain glycolysis could fuel pumping activity to restore Na+ and
K+ levels after membrane potential deviations. Such increases in
Na+/K+ ATPase activity would be expected to affect the local ATP:
ADP ratio and increase KATP channel activity. While it is yet to
be determined whether such highly localized glycolytic-KATP
channel complexes contribute to EMS, this is an intuitive and
appealing possibility.
Beyond glucose, variations in the availability of other energy
substrates could trigger EMS through similar principles but the
involvement of distinct molecular players. The heart, in contrast
to the brain, has been described as “omnivorous,” in that it
generates ATP from an array of substrates (Wende et al., 2017).
Under normal conditions in healthy adults, free fatty acid oxidation takes center-stage in heart metabolism, generating
acetyl-coA, which is then utilized to produce ATP via oxidative
phosphorylation. In contrast, catabolism of glucose makes only a
small contribution to cardiac energy under working conditions
(e.g., only 5% of ATP is produced by glycolysis), but this balance
may shift when the heart is under stress. Further contributions
to heart metabolism are provided by amino acids, ketone bodies,
and circulating lactate (Ritterhoff and Tian, 2017).
The kidney also has incredibly high energy demands, turning
over large amounts of ATP to enable its roles in filtering waste
from the blood, reabsorbing nutrients, and regulating pH and
blood pressure. This organ exhibits regional dependence on
energy substrate preference, with the proximal tubules in the
renal cortex relying on the oxidation of free fatty acids to generate large amounts of ATP to accommodate the high level of
water and solute transport occurring at this location (indeed, the
complete β-oxidation of a fatty acid molecule is more energetically lucrative than glucose oxidation—for example, the 16-
carbon fatty acid palmitate will yield 106 ATP versus ∼32 ATP
per glucose molecule). The lower O2 environment of the medulla
and distal tubules relies instead on glucose for glycolysis (Alsahli
and Gerich, 2017; Bhargava and Schnellmann, 2017). These
variances in energy preferences across organs, locally within
tissues, and under different circumstances thus raise the possibility that fluctuations in local availability of a range of energy
substrates may alter intracellular energy status to then activate
EMS in a substrate-tailored and location-dependent manner.
Metabolically driven release of mediators. Increased metabolic
activity may also drive the release of canonical vasodilatory
mediators from active tissue. These may include (but are not
limited to) adenosine, which is a direct product of the breakdown of ATP via ADP and AMP and is released in the brain (Wall
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 11 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
and Dale, 2008; Wu et al., 2023), skeletal muscle (Hellsten et al.,
1998), and heart during increased activity (Hori and Kitakaze,
1991); K+ which, while not a direct metabolic byproduct, is released during action potentials and thus accurately reflects local
activity in electrically active tissues (Ballanyi et al., 1996;
Rasmussen et al., 2019); and NO, a diffusible gas which is produced in response to Ca2+ elevations in metabolically active tissues such as the brain (Garthwaite, 2019) and skeletal muscle
(Stamler and Meissner, 2001). The documentation of metabolically driven mediators is underway in a range of tissues, and a
full accounting of these will be necessary to gain a complete
understanding of the diverse EMS mechanisms throughout tissues, several of which may operate in parallel to ensure
the fidelity of energy delivery in response to changes in local
metabolism. One mediator that is a direct product of metabolism and is therefore well suited for EMS is lactate.
Lactate as a signaling molecule. Pyruvate generated during
glycolysis can be metabolized by LDH enzymes to lactic acid
which ionizes to form lactate, at the same time generating NAD+.
This is a reversible reaction in which lactate and NAD+ can also
be converted into NADH and pyruvate. In the brain, the reversibility of this reaction forms the basis of the ANLS model,
although observations of lactate flux favoring brain exit to the
circulation have questioned the extent to which this mechanism
is favored for neuronal ATP generation (Dienel, 2012). Nevertheless, lactate levels in the brain clearly do increase during
activity (Prichard et al., 1991; Hu and Wilson, 1997a, 1997b), and
interestingly the activity of KATP channels in neocortical neurons has been shown to be modulated by the level of extracellular lactate, with its accumulation inhibiting KATP channels
composed of Kir6.2 and SUR1 subunits after its transport into
cells and subsequent metabolism, thus depolarizing the cell
membrane and increasing firing rate (Karagiannis et al., 2021).
Intriguingly, activation of vascular KATP channels by intracellular lactate has been observed in SMCs (Han et al., 1993), resulting instead in membrane hyperpolarization. These disparate
observations raise the need for further work to determine the
precise fate of lactate in the brain and delineate the responses of
different cells of the neurovascular unit to local extra- and intracellular lactate levels and establish underlying mechanisms.
One consistent observation, however, is that accumulation of
lactate causes vasodilation of local arterioles and arterioleproximate capillaries through several mechanisms including
modulation of contractile pericyte Ca2+ (Yamanishi et al., 2006),
nitric oxide (NO)–dependent activation of vascular KATP channels (Hein et al., 2006), and the actions of extracellular prostaglandin E2 (Gordon et al., 2008). While further work is needed to
determine the relative contributions of these mechanisms to
blood flow control in arterioles and throughout the capillary bed,
these observations suggest that the increases in lactate that occur in the brain during concerted activity can be sensed by the
vasculature and converted into hyperemia, thus fitting the
profile of an EMS signaling molecule.
Beyond the flow of brain lactate into the vascular system, the
levels of lactate in the blood are strongly correlated to the level of
lactate in working muscle, and a major fate of this molecule is to
be transported to the liver where it is used to synthesize glucose
or glycogen through the processes of gluconeogenesis and glyconeogenesis (Rui, 2014). However, it is also evident that circulating lactate can be directly taken up by cells as a carbon
source (Quistorff et al., 2020) and this raises the possibility
of whole-organism activity and energy state regulating EMS
broadly throughout a number of tissues. For example, during
intense whole-animal activity, the release of lactate could act as
an EMS trigger in skeletal muscle as noted in the previous section, and the increase in circulating lactate could also drive EMS
through its import into the heart (Duncker and Bache, 2008) and
brain, if the blood concentration is sufficiently high enough to
favor influx (Quistorff et al., 2020). Such a mechanism for lactate triggering coordinated blood flow increases across multiple
organs could serve to rapidly optimize energy delivery during
activity and represents an intriguing avenue for further
exploration.
Gases as metabolic indicators: pO2 and pCO2. Oxidative metabolic pathways converge on the generation of acetyl-coA in the
mitochondria for further metabolic processing via the TCA cycle
to generate electron donors for the ETC, with O2 acting as the
ultimate electron acceptor resulting in its reduction to H2O. This
process of electron transfer generates a large H+ gradient across
the inner mitochondrial membrane, culminating in the generation of ATP through the activity of the ATP synthase (Fig. 2). As
oxidative phosphorylation is dependent on O2, its local partial
pressure (pO2) can dictate the energy production means of the
cell and thus exert influence over the metabolic state.
It is well established that hypoxia acts as a potent vasodilatory stimulus, and seminal studies have demonstrated that
arterial diameter can be bidirectionally modulated as an inverse
function of local pO2 (Jackson, 2016). However, as has been
extensively discussed elsewhere (Taggart and Wray, 1998;
Jackson, 2016), the precise molecular mechanisms through
which decreases in pO2 trigger dilations are not known. Is also
unknown whether hypoxia engages electrical signaling in the
capillary bed, but it seems possible that similar mechanisms to
those evoking arteriolar smooth muscle hyperpolarization may
have evolved in this region of the vasculature to facilitate
communication upstream to control arteriole and proximal
capillary diameter and regulate blood flow in response to local
O2 fluctuations.
In the brain, state-of-the-art measurements of pO2 have recently challenged the controversial view that hyperemiainduced increases in local pO2 are preceded by an initial dip
(Kim et al., 2000; Logothetis, 2000; Buxton, 2001; Lindauer
et al., 2001b; Vanzetta and Grinvald, 2001; Thompson et al.,
2003, 2004; Kasischke et al., 2004; Dunn et al., 2005;
Offenhauser et al., 2005; Sirotin et al., 2009; Hu and Yacoub,
2012; Ma et al., 2016; Aydin et al., 2022), which has been postulated to be driven by increased neuronal metabolism during
activity. Instead, recent data support the view that O2 tension is
initially unchanged by the initiation of neuronal activity and is
then followed by a large influx in O2 during hyperemia (Aydin
et al., 2022). Furthermore, classic positron-emission tomography
experiments have convincingly demonstrated that activityevoked increases in neuronal activity are not associated with
significant increases in O2 consumption but are accompanied by
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 12 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
increased glucose utilization—leading to the hypothesis that
aerobic glycolysis predominates as a mechanism to rapidly
supply energy during sudden increases in brain activity (Raichle
and Mintun, 2006). Accordingly, it appears unlikely that changes
in local pO2 would operate as a trigger of EMS in this organ.
However, in tissues that routinely experience local or global
periods of anaerobic work (e.g., exercising skeletal muscle), pO2
could be an important driver of EMS. Taking the example of
skeletal muscle further, the energetic demands imposed by intensive work here lead to periods in which O2 demand outstrips
supply. In addition to the immediate and rapid ATP supply
provided by the skeletal muscle phosphagen system, glycolysis
predominates during such periods due to the rate at which it can
be rapidly ramped up to produce ATP. Mitochondrial respiration
is comparatively slow as a means of energy production (Baker
et al., 2010), and the decline in intracellular pO2 imposed by the
high energetic demand imposed by intense exercise (Richardson
et al., 1995; Wagner, 2012) will reduce the ability of this system to
supply ATP to meet local needs. During such periods, decreased
intracellular pO2 may act as a direct trigger of EMS by increasing
the production or availability of feed-forward hyperpolarizing/
vasodilating molecules such as prostaglandins and NO (Jackson,
2016). However, the mechanisms for O2-dependent production
of these mediators are not clear and require further experimental attention, but it has been speculated that prostaglandin
production may involve O2-dependent oxidation and inhibition
of upstream cyclooxygenase enzymes (Jackson, 2016).
An interesting layer of pO2-mediated blood flow control can
also be envisioned for extended bouts of hypoxia, where transcriptional changes evoked by the engagement of hypoxiainducible factor (HIF-1; Majmundar et al., 2010; Yuan et al.,
2013) could serve to tune EMS elements and modulate the sensitivity of this system. HIF-1 consists of HIF-1α and HIF-1β subunits, which respond to hypoxia by modulating the expression
of >100 downstream genes (Weidemann and Johnson, 2008;
Masoud and Li, 2015). Notably, hypoxia has been associated with
HIF-1–mediated upregulation of Kir6.1/SUR2 KATP channel expression (Raeis et al., 2010). A resultant increase in functional
protein at the membrane surface could thus serve to amplify
EMS responses in the affected tissue. Moreover, HIF-mediated
increases in Kir2.1 (central to EMS signal transmission, see below)
have also been reported (Yamamura et al., 2018). Further work is
needed to survey the tissue locations and circumstances in which
drops in pO2 act to promote vasodilation and to establish the
precise molecular mechanisms through which this leads ultimately to SMC membrane hyperpolarization and vasodilation.
Exploring the full impact of hypoxia on EMS signaling pathways is
thus an intriguing avenue for experimental investigation.
An obligate byproduct of aerobic metabolic activity is CO2,
which is produced during the cyclical processing of citrate to
oxaloacetate during the TCA cycle. As a gas, CO2 diffuses from its
point source of production and is ultimately removed from the
blood. Accordingly, CO2 readily passes through the SMCs, ECs,
and pericytes of the vasculature, which may have intrinsic
mechanisms to detect local pCO2. In addition to binding to deoxygenated RBCs and being secreted via ventilation, a major
fate of CO2 is to be processed by the large family of carbonic
anhydrase metalloenzymes, which catalyze the interconversion
of CO2 and H2O to carbonic acid (H2CO3) which can, in turn,
dissociate to form bicarbonate ions (HCO3−) and protons (H+).
Normally, pCO2 in the tissue is tightly controlled at around 40
mmHg (Patel and Sharma, 2023). During an increase in oxidative metabolic activity, the increase in CO2 generated can result
in an increase in H+ concentration, decreasing pH. The cerebral
circulation is remarkably sensitive to CO2-induced acidification,
with most vessels exhibiting rapid dilation to acidosis through
multiple mechanisms detailed below and as such, hypercapnia
produces robust blood flow responses in the brain and appears
to play a major role in the process of neurovascular coupling
(Hosford et al., 2022). At the arteriolar level, a central mechanism through which this occurs is the conversion of cytosolic Ca2+
waves to Ca2+ sparks in SMCs which activate large-conductance
Ca2+ activated K+ (BK) channels to hyperpolarize the membrane
(Dabertrand et al., 2012), likely through a decrease in the open
probability of ryanodine receptors (RyRs) in the sarcoplasmic
reticulum (Wray and Burdyga, 2010). H+ ions can also decrease the activity of L-type voltage-dependent Ca2+ channels
(VDCCs; West et al., 1992), increase the generation of NO
(Lindauer et al., 2001a), and stimulate KATP channels (Wang
et al., 2003). An exception to these responses in the cerebral
circulation is the arterioles of the brainstem retrotrapezoid
nucleus, a key chemosensory region responsible for regulating ventilation in response to changes in blood pH (Cleary
et al., 2020). Here, CO2 drives a decrease in vessel diameter,
which is thought to concentrate the CO2/H+ stimulus for
chemosensing neurons, thus ensuring a more robust increase
in ventilation to clear excess CO2.
The circulation in a range of peripheral organs also exhibits
sensitivity to hypercapnia. In the coronary vasculature, stimulation of NO generation is thought to play an important role in
mediating dilation in response to increased pCO2 (Heintz et al.,
2005; Tzou et al., 2007), and similar mechanisms have been
suggested in the brachial artery (de Matthaeis et al., 2014). In the
mesenteric arteries of the intestines, hypercapnic vasodilation
has been attributed to KATP channel engagement promoting
membrane hyperpolarization (Wang et al., 2003). In skeletal
muscle, as discussed above, acidosis and increases in CO2 up to
10% cause vasodilation and elevate blood flow (Lamb et al., 1966;
Charter et al., 2018). In the kidney, which plays a central role in
acid-base balance of the blood stream, hypercapnia instead induces vasoconstrictor responses and decreases renal blood flow
through mechanisms that have not been fully clarified but appear to involve activation of the renal nerve (Norman et al., 1970;
Chapman et al., 2020). Thus, in the context of EMS CO2 likely
plays distinct tissue-dependent roles, with many organs (brain,
heart, skeletal muscle) equipped to respond to increases in CO2/
H+ and resultant acidosis by generating membrane hyperpolarization to increase blood flow.
Redox state. Reactive oxygen species (ROS) are highly reactive O2-containing molecules that are generated during oxidative phosphorylation in mitochondria through electron leak,
resulting in the reduction of molecular O2, and by NADPH oxidases in the cytosol. ROS play important physiological signaling
roles within cells and common species include superoxide anion
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 13 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
radicals (O2·
−), hydroxyl radicals (·OH), and nonradical oxidants
such as hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) and singlet oxygen (1
O2). In
addition to their roles in varied processes such as signal transduction and control of gene expression (Nose, 2000; Forman
et al., 2010; Checa and Aran, 2020), during heightened activity
ROS production can exceed the capacity of antioxidant mechanisms in the cell, allowing these molecules to build to disruptive
levels. This accumulation damages DNA and proteins and interferes with the operation of important signaling pathways
such as NO-mediated communication (Forstermann, 2010 ¨ ; Checa
and Aran, 2020). Redox homeostasis is thus a critical factor in
ensuring the continued smooth functioning of cells on a moment-to-moment basis.
Interestingly, important roles for NADPH oxidases 2 and 4
(NOX2; NOX4)—key sources of cytosolic ROS—in endothelialdependent vasodilation have been reported. In cerebral arteries,
endothelial NOX2 is associated with transient receptor potential ankyrin 1 (TRPA1) channels, which respond to NOX2-
derived ROS with Ca2+ signals that couple to EC small- and
intermediate-conductance Ca2+-activated K+ channels to produce
vasodilation (Sullivan et al., 2015). Importantly, TRPA1 channels
in capillary endothelial cells have also recently been shown to
contribute the capillary-to-arteriole electrical signaling in the
brain (Thakore et al., 2021), raising the possibility for ROSinitiated long-distance communication within the vasculature.
NOX4 has also been observed in ECs (and also appears to be
expressed by some pericytes [He et al., 2018; Vanlandewijck
et al., 2018]) and has been proposed to drive membrane hyperpolarization through the generation of H2O2 (Ray et al., 2011),
which promotes the activity of KATP and Ca2+-activated K+
channels (Bychkov et al., 1999; Matoba et al., 2000; Dantzler
et al., 2019). As H2O2 is able to readily permeate membranes, it
could also act as an intercellular indicator of redox status and as a
signaling molecule, although its brief half-life likely limits its
active range prior to decomposition (Lennicke et al., 2015; Ledo
et al., 2022). These observations support the possibility that
changes in tissue redox state brought about by increases in oxidative metabolism or membrane NADPH oxidase activity may
couple directly to electrical activity, which in the vasculature
could be translated into increases in blood flow. The resultant
incoming blood might not only provide further energy substrates
for metabolism but could also serve a homeostatic function by
delivering circulating antioxidant molecules to active tissues to
redress redox balance. Experiments involving direct measurements of ROS levels during tissue activity changes, and manipulation of their levels in conjunction with blood flow measurements
are needed to test these ideas which likely necessitates the development of new and more sensitive indicators.
The foregoing provides a non-exhaustive outline of known
and unexplored but potentially important EMS triggers. Following the triggering event, a membrane electrical signal must
next be generated that can ultimately influence blood flow.
Stage II: Chemical-to-electrical transduction and propagation
mechanisms underpin EMS
Upon detection of biochemical changes resulting from elevated
metabolic activity in a tissue, the second stage of EMS centers on
the conversion of this initiating factor into an electrical signal in
the vasculature that can propagate to reach from the initiation
site through multiple vessel branches to contractile mural cells
(Box 1). Alternatively, the process of electrical signal generation
could also occur directly in arterioles if the initiating cells are
suitably proximal, although, in general, this is likely to be secondary, simply due to the relative paucity of spatial coverage by
arterioles and the much more extensive arborization of the
capillaries that forms the bulk of the vasculature throughout all
tissues (Fig. 4). This close association with working cells thus
ideally positions capillaries as the primary sensors and responders to local activity (Gould et al., 2017).
K+ channels as signal generators. In many excitable cells,
electrical signaling takes the form of regenerative, propagating
depolarizations that characterize action potentials (e.g., cardiac
myocytes, neurons, pancreatic β cells, and gut smooth muscle)
generated by Na+- or Ca2+-permeable channels. In the vasculature, the organization of electrical signaling could be conceived
of as being “inverted,” with the dominant role played by hyperpolarizations generated through K+ channel activity. Below,
we outline studies supporting this conception of electrical signaling throughout the vasculature.
KATP channels generate signals in response to energy
deficits. Recently, we found that KATP channels take center stage
in generating electrical signals in capillaries, which are then
transmitted over long distances during EMS in the brain and
heart. In the brain, the pericytes found on the abluminal wall of
the capillaries greatly extend the sensory capabilities of the
vessels by imbuing them with the ability to directly respond to
the availability of local glucose (see Stage I, above) and likely a
broad range of other signals through their repertoire of G
protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) and ion channels (Hariharan
et al., 2020). Analysis of recent brain single-cell RNAseq data
revealed that KATP channels account for nearly half of the total
expression of all ion channel genes in these pericytes (Hariharan
et al., 2020) and acts as a reliable marker of these cells in mice
(He et al., 2018; Vanlandewijck et al., 2018). These channels are
also expressed by human pericytes (Crouch et al., 2022; Yang
et al., 2022; although note that not all studies find enrichment of
KATP genes in humans [Song et al., 2020]) and have recently
been shown to be functional in mouse brain and retinal pericytes (Sancho et al., 2022). We thus examined the role of these
channels in pericyte-mediated control of blood flow and strikingly, our studies suggest that the electrical signal resulting from
the activation of KATP channels in a single pericyte is capable of
exerting robust control of upstream capillaries covered by
contractile pericytes and arterioles and can be triggered by a fall
in local glucose availability (Hariharan et al., 2022). This KATP
channel-dependent basis for EMS extends to other tissues, with
a variant having initially been detected by us in the heart (Zhao
et al., 2020a), where KATP channels positioned in cardiac myocytes are electrically coupled to adjacent capillary ECs. Here, as
the work of cardiac myocytes increases, impacting intracellular
energy status, KATP channel open probability increases, and this
drives membrane hyperpolarization which is likely passed via a
small number of gap junctions from the cardiac myocyte to
its surrounding capillaries. From here, the signal can spread
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 14 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
throughout the vasculature to modulate blood flow (Longden
et al., 2023). Similar mechanisms may also operate in other
tissues in which KATP channels play important signaling roles
such as the pancreas or skeletal muscle. Accordingly, we posit
that KATP channels activated by a wide variety of metabolic
signals (see Stage I) operate as the central node in the EMS
signaling network generating electrical signals to influence
blood flow.
In addition to KATP channels, other K+ channels known to be
expressed throughout the vasculature might also contribute to
electrical signal generation. For example, in the arteriolar endothelium, small- and intermediate-conductance Ca2+-activated
Figure 4. EMS transmission mechanisms. (A) Comparison of the vascular volume in a 1 mm3 block of cortical tissue comprised by surface arteries, penetrating arterioles, and the capillary bed. Capillaries comprise about 85% of the vasculature by volume, with the penetrating arterioles contributing just 3%.
Thus, the capillaries are ideally positioned to act as a sensory array communicating information on tissue activity to the arterioles to regulate blood flow.
Adapted with permission from Gould et al. (2017). (B) The central image depicts an arteriole lined by arterial endothelial cells (aECs) and surrounded by smooth
muscle cells (SMCs). Downstream of this emerge capillaries, the proximal branches of which are covered in contractile pericytes. Deeper downstream branches
are covered by thin-strand pericytes. The dotted box depicts events leading to the initiation of EMS in the capillary bed, leading to the generation and
transmission of hyperpolarizing signals. In inset i (middle), a specific example is given for a decrease in glucose availability based on Hariharan et al. (2022),
which engages KATP channels. This hyperpolarization can be passed via gap junctions (GJs) into the underlying capillary endothelial cells (cECs), which may then
transmit the signal upstream via the mechanism depicted in inset ii (bottom). Here, hyperpolarization in the endothelium relieves the voltage-dependent block
of Kir2.1 channels by polyamines, leading to K+ efflux and regeneration of membrane hyperpolarization through the engagement of further Kir2.1 channels as
the signal travels upstream. Once it arrives in the proximal capillaries and arteriolar segment (inset iii, top), the electrical signal can be transmitted via gap
junctions into both the contractile pericytes and upstream SMCs, where its arrival decreases the open probability of voltage-dependent Ca2+ channels and
produces a decrease in intracellular Ca2+ which relaxes the Ca2+-sensitive contractile machinery and promotes vasodilation and an increase in blood flow.
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 15 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
K+ channels are engaged during Ca2+ elevations. The resultant
hyperpolarization can be transmitted to the underlying SMCs
via gap junction-containing myo-endothelial projections—
specialized points of contact between ECs and SMCs through the
fenestrated internal elastic lamina of these vessels. These
channels may thus also contribute to EMS as signal generators or
boosters, and further work is needed to address whether this is
the case. Yet other K+ channel isoforms in the endothelium,
pericytes, and smooth muscle (e.g., KV and BK channels in the
latter [Brayden and Nelson, 1992; Straub et al., 2009; Jackson,
2017]) could also contribute to this process. It is also possible that
some capillary conducted responses may be fully or partially
Ca2+-mediated. For example, recent work (Thakore et al., 2021)
has shown TRPA1-initiated Ca2+ signals spreading throughout
capillaries—via pannexin hemichannel release of ATP in turn
activating P2X receptors on endothelial cells—at ∼35 µm/s, ultimately activating SK and IK channels which then generate
electrical signals for the upstream arteriole.
Kir2.1 channels mediate signal propagation through the
vasculature. Once a hyperpolarizing electrical signal has been
generated in response to metabolic activity, it must be
transmitted—in some cases over long distances—to reach upstream capillaries and arterioles covered with contractile cells
(Box 1) to drive their relaxation. In the brain, we initially
characterized this process in capillary ECs, which express the
strong-inward rectifier K+ (Kir2.1) channel (Longden and Nelson,
2015; Longden et al., 2017; Harraz et al., 2018a; Moshkforoush
et al., 2020). This channel responds directly to both increases in
external K+ and, importantly, hyperpolarization (Longden and
Nelson, 2015). These stimuli can relieve the voltage-dependent
block of Kir2.1 channels by the positively charged intracellular
polyamines (such as spermine and putrescine) and Mg2+ that
produce their characteristic inwardly rectifying current–voltage
relationship. The blocking process here likely results from a
combination of charge screening through the interaction of
polyamines with key residues in the channels’ inner vestibule
outlined above, lowering the K+ permeation rate, along with
direct pore occlusion at more depolarized potentials (Xie et al.,
2002). The process of blockade relief by K+ elevation and/or an
initial hyperpolarization can generate a feed-forward effect
that—if it overcomes the background depolarizing conductances
of the cell (Tsoukias et al., 2007)—can rapidly drive the membrane potential to close to the K+ equilibrium potential (EK)
through K+ efflux (Longden and Nelson, 2015). These properties
of Kir2.1 and its expression throughout the capillary endothelium form the basis for a minimal regenerative electrical signaling system that allows for the long-range transmission of
hyperpolarizations. Conceptually, injection of sufficient current
into an endothelial cell at any point in a capillary network could
be passed via gap junctions (likely composed of connexins 43 and
45; He et al., 2018; Vanlandewijck et al., 2018; Hariharan et al.,
2020) into adjacent endothelial cells where it can regenerate
itself through the unblocking of resident Kir2.1 channels in the
next cell. In principle, this process can generate electrical signals
that can traverse long vascular distances to reach the upstream
supplying arteriole to drive (Fig. 4). Evidence for such a capillary-to-arteriole signaling system has now been provided by a
number of studies in both brain and heart (Longden et al., 2017,
2023; Zhao et al., 2020a; Hariharan et al., 2022), and similar
findings have emerged in skeletal muscle (Lamb et al., 2018).
Moreover, studies in arterioles have provided evidence for longrange conduction at this level of the vascular bed (Emerson and
Segal, 2001), and these electrical signals can be readily transferred from ECs to SMCs (Yamamoto et al., 1999; Sonkusare
et al., 2016). It is likely that similar mechanisms operate in
other tissues and further studies are needed to address this
possibility.
The heart is distinct from the brain in that direct current
injection from the cardiac myocyte through a sparse set of gap
junctions could provide a low-pass filtered current source for
hyperpolarizing or depolarizing changes in capillary voltage.
Direct measurements of voltage are needed in all cell types, and
implementing novel imaging tools such as genetically encoded
voltage indicators to enable these measurements is therefore
essential.
Together, the K+ channels that act as signal generators for
EMS—primarily KATP channels—pass signals on to the Kir2.1
channels that mediate distance transmission of electrical signals
through the vascular network to enable the precise delivery of
blood to the tissue in the third and final stage of this process.
Stage III: Hyperpolarizing electrical signaling adjusts blood flow as
the homeostatic output of EMS
After its transmission through the capillary network, an electrical signal will arrive at vascular branches covered with contractile cells—either contractile pericytes in the proximal
branches of the capillary bed or SMCs covering arterioles and
arteries. The mechanisms governing contractile pericyte contraction and relaxation have not been elucidated in detail, but
given their expression of α-SMA (Box 1) and the presence of
functional VDCCs (Gonzales et al., 2020), these are likely to be
relatively similar to those of upstream SMCs, which we focus on
here (although it is noteworthy that differences in the ion
channel complement and relative expression of several proteins
have been reported between these two cell types which likely
contribute to functional differences [Gonzales et al., 2020;
Ratelade et al., 2020]).
In SMCs, the interplay between membrane potential and
intracellular Ca2+ is critically important. An electrical signal
arriving at the arteriolar endothelium can be readily transferred to the smooth muscle via gap junction-containing
myoendothelial projections, as noted above. This handover of
hyperpolarization in turn will close L-type voltage-gated Ca2+
channels (VGCCs) embedded in the sarcolemma, which in turn
decreases global intracellular Ca2+. In SMCs, global Ca2+ levels
are sensed by calmodulin, which influences the activity of myosin light chain kinase, which transfers phosphates from ATP to
the myosin head group to enable its interaction with actin fibers
in the process of actin–myosin crossbridge cycling. Accordingly,
a fall in Ca2+ in the SMC resulting from VGCC closure will interrupt this process, leading to a relaxation of the contractile
machinery. This process playing out through many cells along
the length of the vessel in response to a vasodilatory stimulus
leads to dilation of the arteriole and an increase in blood flow.
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 16 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
The magnitude and reach of an arriving electrical signal will
determine the resolution of the blood flow response. Here, the
steep relationship between membrane potential and SMC tone
will dictate the size of the resultant diameter change. In pressurized cerebral arteries, SMC membrane potential is roughly
−40 mV under resting conditions (Knot and Nelson, 1998),
which closely aligns also with the resting potentials of capillary
endothelial cells and pericytes (Hariharan et al., 2022; Sancho
et al., 2022). At −60 mV, these arteries are almost maximally
dilated, and thus arriving signals with a magnitude within this
20-mV range produce a nearly linear effect on vessel diameter
which exponentially amplifies blood flow as a product of the
fourth power of the vessel radius, as described by the HagenPoiseuille equation. This voltage–diameter relationship is well
supported in cerebral arteries and has also been explored in
detail in arteries from hamster cheek pouch and intestine (Xia
and Duling, 1998) and skeletal muscle (Wolfle et al., 2011 ¨ ). Indeed, in the latter, vessels are maximally constricted at approximately −35 mV and maximally dilated at approximately
−50 mV, further illustrating the incredibly sensitive relationship
between vessel diameter and membrane voltage (Kotecha and
Hill, 2005). It will be important to fully elucidate these relationships for arterioles controlling blood flow to capillary beds in
each tissue of interest, as differences in expression and environment may influence their range, linearity, and steepness
which consequently shapes the hemodynamic response.
If a signal is transmitted from capillaries in a metabolically
active area to a feed arteriole that has multiple capillary offshoots along its length, the bulk increase in blood flow through
the artery in response to its dilation could be expected to be
distributed throughout all capillaries emanating from this vessel
(Fig. 5). In contrast, if a signal reaches only the contractile
pericyte-covered capillary nearest to its point of origin (i.e.,
reaches the proximal capillaries but not the arteriole itself),
the blood flow increase resulting from the dilating capillary
would be expected to be much smaller and more localized, being
a product of the dilating capillary diverting blood away from
other areas of the network by modifying the path-of-least-resistance for flow (and absent a global increase in blood flow
elicited by dilating the feed arteriole). Thus, the resolution of the
blood delivery through the capillary network (i.e., the number of
branches experiencing hyperemia) is predicted to be a function
of the reach (i.e., length constant) and magnitude of electrical
signals, assuming no changes in other ongoing processes (Fig. 5).
However, the α-SMA-expressing precapillary sphincters found
at the point of transition from arteriole to capillary in multiple
capillary beds including those of the brain (He et al., 2010; Grubb
et al., 2020), heart (Anderson and Anderson, 1980), and skeletal
muscle (Rhodin, 1967) also likely play an important role in
controlling hyperemic resolution at this level of the vascular tree
through moment-to-moment modification of their contractile
state. An electrical signal arriving from a capillary tree in an
active area of tissue is expected to open the gateway sphincter as
it passes into the arteriole, while other sphincters controlling
flow to other non-electrically active capillary networks fed by
the same arteriole remain closed. This would accordingly promote a preferential distribution of blood to the capillaries in the
active region downstream of the relaxing sphincter. As long as
the sphincters controlling the access of blood to other capillary
offshoots remain constricted at the same time, this should amplify blood flow to the electrically active capillaries while minimizing the perturbation of flow through capillaries in areas that
are not currently generating EMS signals. There are likely even
more mechanisms for modifying flow pathways through the
capillaries. For example, signals inducing slow or tonic constrictions of thin-strand pericytes (Fernandez-Klett et al., 2010 ´ ;
Hartmann et al., 2021) may selectively narrow certain vessels to
alter the path of least resistance through the capillary bed over
longer time scales. Furthermore, data indicating that contractile
pericytes located at branch points can independently regulate
perfusion through the daughter branches they cover suggest
that the regulation of blood distribution is highly complex and
controlled at multiple levels (Gonzales et al., 2020). Fully
studying all such possibilities will be necessary to arrive at a
model that captures the complexity of the regulation of blood
flow through capillary networks. It is also interesting to consider
that electrical signals arriving at the venous side of the vasculature could be an important component of EMS. Detailed
information on the flow of electrical signals through threedimensional vascular networks in combination with dynamic
tissue activity, vessel diameter, and blood flow measurements is
thus a critically important development that is needed to fully
understand exactly how these blood delivery issues are handled
across tissues and under varying metabolic loads.
The shape of the blood flow response will be influenced thus
by the length constant of an electrical signal, and also its magnitude and duration. In vivo, the duration of arriving electrical
signals will likely differ depending on the tissue, the type of
activity for which blood is being supplied, and the specific molecular setup of the local vasculature, among other factors.
Broadly, electrical signaling could operate in either analog or
digital modes. In the brain, present data suggest that the electrical signaling component of EMS in response to local activity
most closely resembles a digital electrical signal (Fig. 4), which
propagates in a regenerative fashion through the vasculature to
drive upstream dilation and increase blood flow. These signals
have rapid on- and off-kinetics and their duration is tied closely
to the length of the stimulus. This digital signal analogy is supported by data indicating an all-or-none property of electrical
signaling through brain capillaries, in that stimuli below K+
concentrations of 7 mM are ineffective in changing arteriole
diameter, whereas K+ concentrations above this concentration
evoke near-maximal dilation of the upstream arteriole (Longden
et al., 2017). This behavior can be explained from the perspective
of the Kir channel by introducing a bistable membrane potential
with points of stability at EK when channels are fully active
and the resting membrane potential when they are closed
(Moshkforoush et al., 2020). Similarly, the transfer of signals
along lengths of arterial tissue has been studied in detail, and
this work reveals the conduction of electrical signals along the
endothelium which is largely sustained at distances of up to
2 mm, suggesting an active regeneration mechanism (Emerson
and Segal, 2000, 2001), which is readily transferred laterally to
the smooth muscle (Yamamoto et al., 1999).
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 17 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
Figure 5. Electrical signal length constants and resolution of blood flow control. Concepts are depicted for brain vasculature. Similar principles likely
apply in other organs, modified by specific angioarchitectural features and molecular configurations. (A) Brain vasculature. Top: Top-down view showing
overlapping pial (surface) arterial and veinous networks. Bottom: Side-view showing a pial artery transitioning to a penetrating arteriole as it dives into the
brain and gives way to the capillary network. Left inset: Neurovascular unit at the initial capillaries surrounded by contractile pericytes. Right inset:
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 18 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
In other tissues and in other tissue activity scenarios, a form
of analog signaling could predominate. From a biophysical perspective, such signaling would be by its nature non-regenerative
and non-propagative and could instead be organized around the
electrotonic conduction of potentials according to the cable
properties of the local vessels. Possible molecular configurations
that would enable such a signal would be a capillary bed that
receives electrical input via gap junctions from either parenchymal cells or overlying pericytes acting as signal generators,
while at the same time lacking a high density of Kir channels in
the ECs. Without a regenerative mechanism to amplify and
propagate the signal, a voltage change would instead exponentially decay as a function of vessel distance, the degree of
membrane leak, and the size of other “background” conductances. EMS operating in this mode would thus give rise to
signals that are a more direct function of the amplitude and
duration of the initiating metabolic stimulus and would as a
result likely operate over slower and more local time scales and
shape the blood flow response accordingly (Fig. 5).
The incoming blood that results from these dilations initiated
by EMS performs multiple homeostatic functions. In addition to
the delivery of energy substrates and O2, CO2, lactate, and other
waste products generated during metabolic activity are removed
(Fig. 1), and in the process pH and temperature of the tissue may
be regulated also. Accordingly, the increase in metabolic activity
in the tissue is compensated for and deviations in intracellular
energy state (i.e., changes in ATP:ADP ratio) are reversed, effectively matching energy demand to supply and ensuring continued
optimal function of the tissue.
Taken together, the three stages of the EMS hypothesis outlined above provide a mechanistic framework enabling the accurate and timely coupling of energy supply through blood flow
to local metabolic needs in highly active tissues. We postulate
that EMS variants operate in all tissues with high energy consumption (e.g., brain, heart, kidney, skeletal muscle) and likely
also in other areas and that this precise matching helps to ensure
the health and function of local cells on a moment-to-moment
basis across long periods of time.
EMS uncoupling as a mediator of aging
We posit that EMS plays a key role in matching the energetic
demands of varied physiological processes with precise moment-to-moment energy substrate delivery via the blood. It thus
follows that processes that disrupt EMS would be detrimental to
overall tissue function, stemming from an inability to meet
ongoing energetic demands. Aging is one such process that could
degrade EMS and is characterized by a panoply of functional
changes that result in overall organismal decline. A number of
hallmarks of the aging process have been defined and these
include genomic instability, telomere attrition, epigenetic alterations, loss of proteostasis, disabled macroautophagy, deregulation of nutrient sensing, mitochondrial dysfunction, cellular
senescence, stem cell exhaustion, inflammation, dysbiosis, and
alterations to intercellular communication (López-Ot´ın et al.,
2023).
It is possible that age-related alterations to intercellular signaling (for example, due to the loss of cardiac and vascular KATP
channel function that has been documented in older animals
[Yang et al., 2016]) could be a proximate cause that deranges the
metabolic sensing or signal transmission aspects of EMS, which
would then be expected to contribute further to the aging process. It is not difficult to conceive that the reduced substrate
delivery emanating from impaired blood flow regulation due to
loss of EMS could then play into mitochondrial dysfunction and
thus exert an outsized impact on cellular energy status. Indeed,
many of the aging hallmarks outlined above depend on precise
control of energy generation and delivery. For example, altered
substrate availability will affect the activity of the mechanistic
target of the rapamycin (MTOR) complex which modulates the
activity of a range of transcription factors influencing the expression of elements that contribute to a huge number of core
cellular activities, including protein synthesis and proteasome
activity, autophagy, and metabolism (López-Ot´ın et al., 2023).
Accordingly, it seems feasible that age-related declines in EMS
could play a key role in aging through knock-on effects on
mechanisms that are at the heart of the aging process. By preventing EMS degradation over long time spans—for example
through the development of gerotherapies that preserve EMS
sensing, transduction, and propagation mechanisms—it may be
possible to preserve overall tissue and organ function and
slow aging.
EMS uncoupling as a driver of organ failure states
Our hypothesis places EMS at the center of blood flow modulation mechanisms in a range of tissues. Extending from the
foregoing, it follows that disease process-related breakdown of
EMS mechanisms could be an initiating factor in the mismatch
between energy supply and demand which then precipitates
metabolic failure states that compromise organ function and
lead to further pathology.
Organ function is intricately intertwined with metabolism,
and thus pathologies that disrupt metabolic function have wideranging and frequently disastrous effects. Metabolic syndrome
is highly prevalent, and in the US is estimated to affect ∼35% of
Neurovascular unit of the deep capillary bed with thin strand pericytes. EC, endothelial cell; GJ, gap junction; PSJ, peg-socket junction; RBC, red blood cell.
(B) Diameter–voltage relationship for a pial artery showing that maximal working range is controlled across ∼30 mV of membrane potential. Adapted with
permission from Knot and Nelson (1998). (C) Regenerative and passive signal transmission modes. Top: Theoretical signal transmission–distance relationships
for regenerative and passive signals. Regenerative mechanisms will conduct over greater lengths of vessel due to the signal being actively renewed. Bottom:
Graphical depiction of regenerative versus passive transmission modes. (D) The length constant of transmission, dictated by input amplitude and the electrical
properties of the local vasculature, will determine the resolution of blood flow control. Top: Activation of large areas of tissue will initiate large signals in the
vasculature that conduct over longer distances and induce more contractile cells to relax and produce a low-resolution blood flow increase that encompasses
many cells. Middle: Smaller metabolically active fields will evoke electrical signals with a shorter length constant, recruiting fewer vessels and evoking more
localized blood flow increases that perfuse a smaller tissue volume. Bottom: The smallest active regions may evoke a higher resolution blood flow increase still.
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 19 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
the population (Hirode and Wong, 2020). It consists of a group
of conditions that encompasses obesity, hypertension, and dyslipidemia among others which greatly increase the risk of developing diabetes, heart disease, and stroke, and is overall linked
to early death (Eckel et al., 2010). A major factor that promotes
the development of metabolic syndrome is a high-fat diet, and
interestingly, this has been associated with the impairment of a
wide range of elements that comprise the EMS mechanisms we
have identified. Specifically, a high-fat diet has been shown to
impair vascular KATP channel function (Fan et al., 2008, 2009)
and endothelial Kir2.1 function (Fancher et al., 2020; Ahn et al.,
2022), the two key EMS elements involved in the transduction of
metabolic signals to changes in membrane electrical activity and
transmission of electrical signals throughout the vasculature,
respectively. Moreover, vascular smooth muscle undergoes a
range of changes in obesity including an increase in the density
of voltage-gated Ca2+ channels which enhances contraction
(Owen et al., 2013), along with a decrease in BK channel function
(Borbouse et al., 2009), promoting hypertension and a decrease
in blood flow.
Such changes would be expected to weaken EMS by reducing
the ability to generate substantial electrical signals, while also
diminishing their propagation throughout the vasculature.
Weaker signals arriving at the arteriolar level would also encounter a higher basal contractile state, resulting from a higher
level of intracellular Ca2+ at a given membrane potential. This is
predicted to further limit the ability of the arriving hyperpolarization to drive a significant decrease in the level of intracellular Ca2+ to drive dilations and increase blood flow to
metabolically active regions. Accordingly, functional disruption
of EMS could be an early event that compounds issues locally
within the affected tissue driven by insufficient energy substrate delivery. Exploration of these possibilities will reveal the
extent of the contribution of EMS disruption to a range of pathologies in organs throughout the body.
The pancreas plays a central role in energy balance by controlling blood glucose levels through insulin secretion. As blood
glucose levels rise (e.g., postprandially) insulin secretion increases, which promotes glucose utilization, uptake, and storage.
Efficient microvascular function and tight control of blood flow
are accordingly essential to pancreatic function, and impairment
of pericyte and capillary signaling as well as structural microvascular abnormalities are early events in the pathogenesis of
diabetes. As such, the loss of blood flow control in pancreatic
islets could be a key event that impacts nutrient sensing, hormone release, and the timely control of glycemic status (Almaça
et al, 2018; Gonçalves et al, 2023). The resulting derangements in
insulin signaling and blood glucose levels in turn will have a
range of further effects that could compromise efficient energy
matching to local metabolic demands and contribute to multiorgan functional decline.
Heart failure is associated with metabolic changes that lead to
loss of efficient energy generation that contributes to profound
impairment of cardiac output. Accordingly, blood flow is disrupted throughout the body, further compounding any existing
energetic issues and creating novel problems associated with a
lack of proper substrate delivery. Due to these far-reaching
ramifications, heart failure is perceived as a complex, multiorgan syndrome with metabolic failure as the central driving
force (Rosano and Vitale, 2018). Under normal circumstances,
the heart predominantly oxidizes free fatty acids but also uses
glucose to produce the ATP needed for optimal function. In heart
failure, insulin resistance is thought to limit glucose utilization
and favor the use of free fatty acids for ketogenesis. This leads to
a reduction in the production of ATP in the heart, which in turn
contributes to a decline in the efficiency of cardiac output. This
is interwoven with other abnormal processes such as structural
changes and an increase in oxidative stress (Rosano and Vitale,
2018). After the onset of cardiac failure, activation of the sympathetic nervous system and renin–angiotensin system may also
trigger an increase in cytokines, angiotensin II, and free fatty
acids. The latter damages the pancreas, impairing insulin regulation of blood glucose and disrupting glucose handling by
skeletal muscle. The elevated angiotensin II can also drive
vasoconstriction—further impairing blood delivery—and hampered endothelial function has been noted in this context
(Ashrafian et al., 2007; Giannitsi et al., 2019). Activation of the
angiotensin AT1 receptor also produces ROS in the vessel wall
which could contribute to signaling processes under normal
conditions but may disrupt components of local EMS mechanisms when out of balance with antioxidants (Nickenig and
Harrison, 2002). Against this backdrop, impairment of EMS
may contribute to disturbed metabolic activity in the heart and
therefore the reduction of cardiac output and its downstream
effects. For example, disruption of KATP-mediated electrical
signaling from cardiac myocytes to ECs (Zhao et al., 2020a)
would be predicted to impair the tight matching of blood flow to
energy demand and therefore contribute to cardiac dysfunction.
Further work is needed to explore this possibility and the potential disruption of other aspects of EMS in the context of heart
disease.
Disruption of cerebral blood flow is thought to be one of the
earliest factors on the path to dementia, in some cases being
detectable decades before the onset of cognitive decline (IturriaMedina et al., 2016). This has been suggested as a watershed
moment that leads to a range of compounding consequences that
ultimately lead to neuronal dysfunction, death, and cognitive
decline. Indeed, it has been postulated that once a critical
threshold of cerebral hypoperfusion has been crossed, a panoply
of cellular issues ensue throughout the neurovascular unit
stemming from this disrupted energy balance (de la Torre,
2000a). These include the degeneration of pericytes (Sagare
et al., 2013; Halliday et al., 2016) and profound alterations to
endothelial (Wang et al., 2018) and smooth muscle cells
(Chabriat et al., 2009), leading, in turn, to further hemodynamic
impairments, increased generation of free radicals by starved
mitochondria, damage of cellular macromolecules, loss of control over membrane potential and ionic imbalance due to Na+/K+
ATPase dysfunction, derangements in Ca2+ handling, impacts on
gene expression, and impaired protein production, posttranslational modification, and trafficking (de la Torre, 2000b). Together, these mounting problems initially cause neuronal
dysfunction and lead ultimately to the death of the cell. As EMS
provides an essential link matching blood flow to neuronal
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 20 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
metabolic needs, subtle functional disturbances in this process
could divorce capillary electrical signaling from local metabolism and thus lead to mismatching between neuronal energy
supply and demand, driving the advancement of the cascade of
issues outlined above. Importantly, such disruptions could be
initiated in the brain capillaries themselves or could arise as the
result of dysfunction in other organs (e.g., pancreas and heart)
leading to inefficiencies in energy substrate supply that disrupt
brain metabolism. Studies taking an integrated multiorgan view
of the cascading effects that result from blood flow impairment
throughout the body are thus essential to explore the impacts of
energy substrate delivery impairment on integrated physiological functioning.
Outstanding questions and future directions
Our recent studies have revealed overlapping yet distinct EMS
mechanisms that operate in both the brain (Hariharan et al.,
2022; Longden et al., 2023) and heart (Zhao et al., 2020a;
Longden et al., 2023). Work in these systems offers a platform to
deepen our understanding EMS in these and other organs, and
here we outline the key outstanding questions at the present
juncture and the technological developments that will be necessary to gain a full understanding of this system and its contributions to health and disease.
Key questions to unlock a deeper understanding of EMS
What is the full range of organ systems that utilize EMS to
match blood flow to cellular metabolic demands? As noted above,
our work has revealed EMS mechanisms in the brain and heart,
but other organs with high energy demands remain unexplored.
Of particular note, the kidneys rank alongside the heart as the
joint-top organs with the highest resting energy expenditure
(Wang et al., 2010). The brain consumes around half as much
ATP “at rest,” followed closely by the liver, with skeletal muscle
and adipose tissue trailing these and accounting for only a small
fraction of basal metabolic rate. Of course, both individual brain
regions and skeletal muscles engage in dramatic changes in their
activity levels (i.e., when engaging in computations or contractions, respectively). Accordingly, it is important to investigate in detail the different types of EMS mechanisms operating
in these tissues and beyond, where variations and modifications
may provide insight into local metabolic regulation. For example, it is possible that EMS is absent in a tissue like the liver,
which maintains a large store of glycogen to draw upon to meet
its energy needs when glucose levels in the blood are low (Rui,
2014). In the kidney, the glomerular filtration rate is homeostatically controlled and is influenced by blood flow, increases in
which drive filtration, greater reabsorption, and increased
metabolic demands. Investigating whether other EMS mechanisms are at play in the kidney at the capillary and arteriolar
levels may yield further useful insights. By extension, surveying
the operation of EMS and its, similarities, differences, and
ramifications throughout all organs are important avenues for
future work.
What is the full range of metabolic triggers of EMS? Current
data suggest important roles for intracellular energy state
(i.e., ATP:ADP ratio) resulting from increased work and
decreased local energy substrate availability as triggering factors
in EMS. Moving forward, it will be important to determine the
full range of factors produced in response to metabolic deviations in eliciting electrical signaling through the vasculature and
their detailed mechanisms. For example, investigating the relationship between lactate and capillary electrical signaling is an
important and tractable set of experiments that is within easy
reach. Measurements of O2 tension in vivo are more difficult but
have been made possible by the development of elegant phosphorescent lifetime imaging approaches (Sakadzic et al., 2010 ´ ).
Improvements in the time resolution of these measurements
and their wider application will offer deeper insights into the
relationship between local O2 fluctuations and blood flow. Given
the huge complexity of biochemical pathways, the number of
potential factors that could engage EMS is vast, and mechanisms
could be tailored to elicit electrical responses from metabolic
processes that produce a wide array of metabolites and byproducts. Efforts to understand the breadth of these metabolic
signaling mechanisms and the specific mechanisms through
which they produce electrical signaling in the vasculature will
thus reveal insights into EMS in a range of contexts.
What is the full range of mechanisms that convert metabolic
load to blood flow elevations at the arteriolar and capillary
levels? Here, we have considered EMS mechanisms primarily
from the standpoint of propagated hyperpolarizations from
capillaries to arterioles. As discussed above, different mechanisms underlying these signals may be tailored to suit the particular blood flow needs of a given tissue. For example, the
kidney requires constant blood flow to enable optimal filtration,
and thus feedback mechanisms to maintain blood flow at a homeostatic set-point may dominate in this organ. In contrast,
heart, brain, and skeletal muscle all exhibit rapid changes in
activity and metabolism across various spatiotemporal domains
and thus the EMS mechanisms that have evolved are likely to be
specialized to meet their individual blood flow requirements.
Although in general arteriole coverage is sparser than the
reach of the capillary bed, it will be important alongside work in
capillaries to understand the EMS mechanisms operating directly in arterioles at the levels of the arteriolar endothelium and
in SMCs, which may have unique mechanisms to sense local
metabolic changes.
How does EMS breakdown contribute to aging and disease? Given
the suspected widespread nature of EMS signaling, the potential
for contribution to aging and to a range of disease processes is
extensive. Aging is characterized by a general decline in function during adulthood. Given the essential need of all organ
systems to match metabolic needs with energy delivery through
tightly controlled blood flow, it is possible that disruption of
EMS makes a key contribution to the aging process. Here, a
decline in the efficiency of EMS mechanisms could lead to a
gradually widening gap between energy demand and delivery,
which in turn is expected to influence essentially all aspects of
cellular health. Extending this to disease processes, contexts for
EMS disruption that are of particular interest are disorders involving a metabolic component such as diabetes, metabolic
syndrome, Alzheimer’s disease, and vascular dementia, and
also rarer inherited metabolic diseases such as Niemann-Pick
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 21 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
disease, Tay-Sachs disease, or porphyria. Accordingly, understanding how EMS contributes to both aging and disease and
finding ways to restore or boost flagging EMS mechanisms may
help to extend the health span of aging individuals and may offer
novel approaches to treat diseases of metabolism that impact a
wide range of organ systems.
Technological developments to enable breakthroughs in
understanding EMS
To enable deeper insight into the organization and operation of
EMS mechanisms described above, key technological developments
are needed that will expand sensing capabilities and augment the
resolution of imaging approaches. Together, these will allow us to
measure EMS in increasingly complex and holistic scenarios.
Development of approaches to directly visualize EMS in tissue
volumes. At present, multiphoton imaging methods are best
suited to imaging hemodynamics and EMS processes occurring
deep within tissues. However, several technical hurdles make
visualization of EMS processes challenging. In particular, standard multiphoton systems are typically restricted to time-lapse
imaging of single planes at video rate using resonant and galvanometer scanning mirrors to guide rapid laser rastering or
acquisition of small volumes at a few hertz using piezoelectric
objective drives. To be able to fully understand EMS, advances
enabling video rate imaging of electrical signaling in large tissue
volumes are required, thus capturing the dynamics occurring
in highly convoluted vascular networks. A number of recent
technical achievements in multiphoton imaging make it feasible
to overcome these issues in the near future. In particular, the
development of FACED microscopy and its extension to blood
flow imaging enables kilohertz imaging of single planes and
megahertz imaging of single lines. These approaches are fast
enough to capture the dynamics of even the fastest moving RBCs
moving through the largest arteries and enable for the first time
the precise measurement of blood flow (i.e., RBC flux and velocity) without the need to completely collapse the spatial dimension to a single line. The application of Bessel-focused beams
has enabled the rapid imaging of considerably larger volumes
than were previously accessible (Fan et al., 2020a), and the
development of SCAPE imaging has also enabled high-speed
dynamic volumetric imaging in vivo (Bouchard et al., 2015;
Voleti et al., 2019). The widespread adoption of these exciting
techniques will enable a more detailed understanding of the
vascular dynamics of various organ systems, and the volume of
data these approaches generate will necessarily spur the development of further automated techniques for analysis.
Accompanying these hardware developments is the need to
develop novel models to enable direct visualization of the EMS
process. Thus, the generation of mouse lines that express stateof-the-art voltage sensors such as ASAP (Evans et al., 2023) or
opto-patch (Fan et al., 2020b) variants in pericytes, ECs, and
SMCs to enable direct visualization of electrical signaling occurring throughout the vasculature of an organism are essential.
These approaches can be combined with other mouse lines and
viral transfection approaches to enable the visualization of local
activity, metabolic processes, and measurements in the vasculature (Zhao et al., 2020b) throughout tissues of interest.
Approaches to visualize the activity of energy substrate availability and metabolic pathway activity in real time. Until recently,
few options have existed to visualize metabolic processes directly, and available techniques required combined measurements from many cells to obtain low temporal resolution
readouts. However, in recent years advances in probe development now promise great insights into metabolic imaging in vivo,
in real time, and with single-cell resolution. Indeed, a range of
recently developed substrate, metabolite, and energy status
sensors are poised to enable visualization of cell metabolism in
unprecedented detail. For example, the recently developed glucose sensor, green glifon (Mita et al., 2019), has an excellent
spatiotemporal resolution, allowing the real-time measurement
of glucose uptake in single cells. Combination of this with viral
vectors that allow for specific expression in cells of interest will
enable real-time monitoring of glucose availability and uptake
during various scenarios (e.g., brain region activation or increased heart contraction). Alongside this glucose sensor, fluorescent protein-based probes for lactate and pyruvate have also
been developed (Harada et al., 2020), and thus their deployment
in various cell types should allow the visualization of glycolytic
flux and the flow of lactate produced during metabolism. The
development of phosphorescent probes with lifetimes that are
sensitive to the local concentration of O2 is also now enabling the
visualization of vessel and tissue oxygenation. These studies are
updating traditional models of O2 diffusion into the tissue such
as the Krogh cylinder by providing novel insights into the dynamics of O2 consumption in working tissue. Improvements in
the spatiotemporal resolution of these imaging techniques and
their deployment in in vivo studies throughout the body will add
layers of detail to our understanding of O2 delivery and utilization (Sakadzic et al., 2010 ´ ; Parpaleix et al., 2013; Lyons et al.,
2016; Aydin et al., 2022).
Operating at the opposite end of the spectrum of substrate
consumption is PercevalHR, a probe for intracellular energy
status. This allows real-time measurement of ATP:ADP ratio and
has been deployed in neurons during activation with glucose,
KCl, or electrical stimulation and provides excellent resolution
revealing how these stimuli alter the ratio of high energy molecules within the cell (Tantama et al., 2013). Notably, several of
these probes are two-photon compatible and so should be deployable in vivo to allow the observation of how these different
aspects of metabolism intersect with one another in a systems
context. Ongoing developments in the field of redox biology,
such as the development of the novel redox probe FROG/B
(Sugiura et al., 2020), also promise to overcome the limitations
of current probes which makes their direct application and interpretation in vivo challenging. Further work to produce
imaging tools with superior signal-to-noise ratio and tailored
subcellular localization in organelles will undoubtedly yield
deeper insights into this exciting area for further development.
Visualization of the nanoscale organization of EMS complexes. A
further priority is determining the specific molecular organization of the signaling components that enable EMS in different
cell types and systems. Considering KATP channels as the central
node of currently known EMS pathways, further work is needed
to establish the specific membrane localization of these channels
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 22 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
in different cells and to elucidate the specific macromolecular
signaling complexes that they occupy. In brain pericytes, for
example, important questions to answer in the near future are
whether the KATP channels are primarily found in the cell body
or in thin-strand processes, or whether they are evenly distributed throughout the plasma membrane. Insights into the
molecular partners with which these channels most closely associate, be that the enzymes of the glycolytic machinery (DharChowdhury et al., 2005), PKA, and A-kinase anchoring proteins
(Hayabuchi et al., 2001), or as yet undetermined signaling
partners, will help in the determination of the precise intracellular mechanisms through which these channels are engaged.
An appealing possibility in this context is that the KATP channel
could occupy a macromolecular signaling complex positioned in
or very close to peg-socket junctions between pericytes and
endothelial cells (Ornelas et al., 2021), permitting the immediate transfer of charge generated by KATP channels into the
underlying endothelium for optimal electrical signaling upstream to arterioles. Further technical developments are
needed to probe EMS at this level of detail, but answering
nanoscale questions will offer insight that likely will be essential for understanding how EMS falters in aging and disease and will be needed for finding potential solutions to
rectifying such issues.
Summary and conclusions
In summary, we outline a hypothesis for EMS as a generalized
blood flow control mechanism operating across tissues with a
wide range of spatiotemporal energy needs. Specifically, EMS
can be initiated by a range of metabolic changes, including those
of substrate availability, altered intracellular energy status, and
byproducts of metabolism. Through the activity of K+ channels
and KATP channels in particular, metabolic cues are converted
into electrical signals in the vasculature which are then conducted along the capillary and arteriolar endothelium to produce
relaxation of upstream SMCs and contractile pericytes and increase blood flow to areas of metabolic need. It is possible that
disruption of EMS in aging and in disease states with metabolic
and vascular components is a key event that leads to a mismatch
between energy supply and demand and participates actively
in the development of cellular dysfunction and nominally irreversible tissue damage. Accordingly, targeting EMS for the
development of novel therapeutics may provide the means to
protect blood flow and energy delivery to tissues, thereby
counteracting the metabolic deficits that arise during aging
(Amorim et al., 2022), and helping to restore energy balance
in diseases ranging from Alzheimer’s and dementia to diabetes, metabolic syndrome, heart failure, and chronic kidney
disease.
As such, research aimed at fully elucidating the physiological
mechanisms of EMS and visualizing its contributions to blood
flow control in complex three-dimensional time-resolved networks is essential. Equally important are investigations of mechanisms by which the EMS may be damaged during aging and
disease. Likewise, therapeutic repair or restoration of damaged
EMS components to ameliorate or fix this damage may provide
partial or complete repair in diverse degenerative diseases.
Acknowledgments
David A. Eisner served as editor.
Support for this work was provided to T.A. Longden by the
National Institutes of Health National Institutes on Aging
(1R01AG066645) and Neurological Disorders and Stroke,
(5R01NS115401, and 1DP2NS121347) and by the American Heart
Association (19IPLOI34660108) and to. W.J. Lederer by the National Institutes of Heart, Lung and Blood (R01 HL142290), Allergy and Infectious Diseases (U19 AI090959), General Medical
Sciences (GM140822), and by special funds from BioMET at the
University of Maryland School of Medicine.
Author contributions: All authors reviewed the manuscript
and approved its submission.
Disclosures: The authors declare no competing interests exist.
Submitted: 26 July 2023
Revised: 27 October 2023
Accepted: 14 December 2023
References
Abd El-Rahman, R.R., O.F. Harraz, S.E. Brett, Y. Anfinogenova, R.E. Mufti, D.
Goldman, and D.G. Welsh. 2013. Identification of L- and T-type Ca2+
channels in rat cerebral arteries: Role in myogenic tone development.
Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol. 304:H58–H71. https://doi.org/10.1152/
ajpheart.00476.2012
Aguilar-Bryan, L., and J. Bryan. 1999. Molecular biology of adenosine
triphosphate-sensitive potassium channels. Endocr. Rev. 20:101–135.
https://doi.org/10.1210/edrv.20.2.0361
Ahn, S.J., I.S. Fancher, J.T. Bian, C.X. Zhang, S. Schwab, R. Gaffin, S.A. Phillips, and I. Levitan. 2017. Inwardly rectifying K+ channels are major
contributors to flow-induced vasodilatation in resistance arteries.
J. Physiol. 595:2339–2364. https://doi.org/10.1113/JP273255
Ahn, S.J., E. Le Master, J.C. Lee, S.A. Phillips, I. Levitan, and I.S. Fancher.
2022. Differential effects of obesity on visceral versus subcutaneous
adipose arteries: Role of shear-activated Kir2.1 and alterations to the
glycocalyx. Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol. 322:H156–H166. https://doi
.org/10.1152/ajpheart.00399.2021
Airan, R.D., K.R. Thompson, L.E. Fenno, H. Bernstein, and K. Deisseroth.
2009. Temporally precise in vivo control of intracellular signalling.
Nature. 458:1025–1029. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature07926
Alarcon-Martinez, L., S. Yilmaz-Ozcan, M. Yemisci, J. Schallek, K. Kılıç, A.
Can, A. Di Polo, and T. Dalkara. 2018. Capillary pericytes express
α-smooth muscle actin, which requires prevention of filamentous-actin
depolymerization for detection. Elife. 7:e34861. https://doi.org/10.7554/
eLife.34861
Allen, P.S., G.O. Matheson, G. Zhu, D. Gheorgiu, R.S. Dunlop, T. Falconer, C.
Stanley, and P.W. Hochachka. 1997. Simultaneous 31P MRS of the soleus
and gastrocnemius in Sherpas during graded calf muscle exercise. Am.
J. Physiol. 273:R999–R1007. https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpregu.1997.273.3.R999
Almaça, J., J. Weitz, R. Rodriguez-Diaz, E. Pereira, and A. Caicedo. 2018. The
pericyte of the pancreatic islet regulates capillary diameter and local
blood flow. Cell Metab. 27:630–644.e4. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cmet
.2018.02.016
Alsahli, M., and J.E. Gerich. 2017. Renal glucose metabolism in normal
physiological conditions and in diabetes. Diabetes Res. Clin. Pract. 133:
1–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.diabres.2017.07.033
Amorim, J.A., G. Coppotelli, A.P. Rolo, C.M. Palmeira, J.M. Ross, and D.A.
Sinclair. 2022. Mitochondrial and metabolic dysfunction in ageing and
age-related diseases. Nat. Rev. Endocrinol. 18:243–258. https://doi.org/10
.1038/s41574-021-00626-7
Anderson, B.G., and W.D. Anderson. 1980. Microvasculature of the canine
heart demonstrated by scanning electron microscopy. Am. J. Anat. 158:
217–227. https://doi.org/10.1002/aja.1001580210
Arnold, P.K., and L.W.S. Finley. 2023. Regulation and function of the mammalian tricarboxylic acid cycle. J. Biol. Chem. 299:102838. https://doi
.org/10.1016/j.jbc.2022.102838
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 23 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
Ashrafian, H., M.P. Frenneaux, and L.H. Opie. 2007. Metabolic mechanisms
in heart failure. Circulation. 116:434–448. https://doi.org/10.1161/
CIRCULATIONAHA.107.702795
Aydin, A.-K., C. Verdier, E. Chaigneau, and S. Charpak. 2022. The oxygen
initial dip in the brain of anesthetized and awake mice. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. USA. 119:e2200205119. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2200205119
Aziz, Q., Y. Li, N. Anderson, L. Ojake, E. Tsisanova, and A. Tinker. 2017.
Molecular and functional characterization of the endothelial ATPsensitive potassium channel. J. Biol. Chem. 292:17587–17597. https://doi
.org/10.1074/jbc.M117.810325
Babenko, A.P., and J. Bryan. 2003. Sur domains that associate with and gate
KATP pores define a novel gatekeeper. J. Biol. Chem. 278:41577–41580.
https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.C300363200
Bagher, P., T. Beleznai, Y. Kansui, R. Mitchell, C.J. Garland, and K.A. Dora.
2012. Low intravascular pressure activates endothelial cell TRPV4
channels, local Ca2+ events, and IKCa channels, reducing arteriolar tone.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 109:18174–18179. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas
.1211946109
Baker, J.S., M.C. McCormick, and R.A. Robergs. 2010. Interaction among
skeletal muscle metabolic energy systems during intense exercise.
J. Nutr. Metab. 2010:905612. https://doi.org/10.1155/2010/905612
Balaban, R.S., H.L. Kantor, L.A. Katz, and R.W. Briggs. 1986. Relation between
work and phosphate metabolite in the in vivo paced mammalian heart.
Science. 232:1121–1123. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.3704638
Ballanyi, K. 2004. Protective role of neuronal KATP channels in brain hypoxia. J. Exp. Biol. 207:3201–3212. https://doi.org/10.1242/jeb.01106
Ballanyi, K., J. Doutheil, and J. Brockhaus. 1996. Membrane potentials and
microenvironment of rat dorsal vagal cells in vitro during energy depletion. J. Physiol. 495:769–784. https://doi.org/10.1113/jphysiol.1996
.sp021632
Baukrowitz, T., U. Schulte, D. Oliver, S. Herlitze, T. Krauter, S.J. Tucker, J.P.
Ruppersberg, and B. Fakler. 1998. PIP2 and PIP as determinants for ATP
inhibition of KATP channels. Science. 282:1141–1144. https://doi.org/10
.1126/science.282.5391.1141
Beach, J.M., E.D. McGahren, and B.R. Duling. 1998. Capillaries and arterioles
are electrically coupled in hamster cheek pouch. Am. J. Physiol. 275:
H1489–H1496. https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpheart.1998.275.4.H1489
Beech, D.J., H. Zhang, K. Nakao, and T.B. Bolton. 1993. K channel activation by
nucleotide diphosphates and its inhibition by glibenclamide in vascular
smooth muscle cells. Br. J. Pharmacol. 110:573–582. https://doi.org/10
.1111/j.1476-5381.1993.tb13849.x
Berthiaume, A.A., R.I. Grant, K.P. McDowell, R.G. Underly, D.A. Hartmann,
M. Levy, N.R. Bhat, and A.Y. Shih. 2018. Dynamic remodeling of pericytes in vivo maintains capillary coverage in the adult mouse brain. Cell
Rep. 22:8–16. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2017.12.016
Bhargava, P., and R.G. Schnellmann. 2017. Mitochondrial energetics in the
kidney. Nat. Rev. Nephrol. 13:629–646. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrneph
.2017.107
Blinder, P., P.S. Tsai, J.P. Kaufhold, P.M. Knutsen, H. Suhl, and D. Kleinfeld.
2013. The cortical angiome: An interconnected vascular network with
noncolumnar patterns of blood flow. Nat. Neurosci. 16:889–897. https://
doi.org/10.1038/nn.3426
Bonev, A.D., and M.T. Nelson. 1996. Vasoconstrictors inhibit ATP-sensitive K+
channels in arterial smooth muscle through protein kinase C. J. Gen.
Physiol. 108:315–323. https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.108.4.315
Bonora, M., S. Patergnani, A. Rimessi, E. De Marchi, J.M. Suski, A. Bononi, C.
Giorgi, S. Marchi, S. Missiroli, F. Poletti, et al. 2012. ATP synthesis and
storage. Purinergic Signal. 8:343–357. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11302-012
-9305-8
Borbouse, L., G.M. Dick, S. Asano, S.B. Bender, U.D. Dincer, G.A. Payne, Z.P.
Neeb, I.N. Bratz, M. Sturek, and J.D. Tune. 2009. Impaired function of
coronary BK(Ca) channels in metabolic syndrome. Am. J. Physiol. Heart
Circ. Physiol. 297:H1629–H1637. https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpheart.00466
.2009
Bouchard, M.B., V. Voleti, C.S. Mendes, C. Lacefield, W.B. Grueber, R.S.
Mann, R.M. Bruno, and E.M.C. Hillman. 2015. Swept confocally-aligned
planar excitation (SCAPE) microscopy for high speed volumetric
imaging of behaving organisms. Nat. Photonics. 9:113–119. https://doi
.org/10.1038/nphoton.2014.323
Brayden, J.E., and M.T. Nelson. 1992. Regulation of arterial tone by activation
of calcium-dependent potassium channels. Science. 256:532–535. https://
doi.org/10.1126/science.1373909
Buttgereit, F., and M.D. Brand. 1995. A hierarchy of ATP-consuming processes in mammalian cells. Biochem. J. 312:163–167. https://doi.org/10
.1042/bj3120163
Buxton, R.B. 2001. The elusive initial dip. Neuroimage. 13:953–958. https://doi
.org/10.1006/nimg.2001.0814
Bychkov, R., K. Pieper, C. Ried, M. Milosheva, E. Bychkov, F.C. Luft, and H.
Haller. 1999. Hydrogen peroxide, potassium currents, and membrane
potential in human endothelial cells. Circulation. 99:1719–1725. https://
doi.org/10.1161/01.CIR.99.13.1719
Chabriat, H., A. Joutel, M. Dichgans, E. Tournier-Lasserve, and M.-G. Bousser.
2009. Cadasil. Lancet Neurol. 8:643–653. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1474
-4422(09)70127-9
Chai, Y., and Y.-F. Lin. 2010. Stimulation of neuronal KATP channels by
cGMP-dependent protein kinase: Involvement of ROS and 5-hydroxydecanoate-sensitive factors in signal transduction. Am. J. Physiol. Cell
Physiol. 298:C875–C892. https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpcell.00196.2009
Chai, Y., D.-M. Zhang, and Y.-F. Lin. 2011. Activation of cGMP-dependent
protein kinase stimulates cardiac ATP-sensitive potassium channels
via a ROS/calmodulin/CaMKII signaling cascade. PLoS One. 6:e18191.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0018191
Chapman, C.L., Z.J. Schlader, E.L. Reed, M.L. Worley, and B.D. Johnson. 2020.
Renal and segmental artery hemodynamic response to acute, mild hypercapnia. Am. J. Physiol. Regul. Integr. Comp. Physiol. 318:R822–R827.
https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpregu.00035.2020
Charter, M.E., I.R. Lamb, and C.L. Murrant. 2018. Arteriolar and capillary
responses to CO2 and H+ in hamster skeletal muscle microvasculature:
Implications for active hyperemia. Microcirculation. 25:e12494. https://
doi.org/10.1111/micc.12494
Checa, J., and J.M. Aran. 2020. Reactive oxygen species: Drivers of physiological and pathological processes. J. Inflamm. Res. 13:1057–1073. https://
doi.org/10.2147/JIR.S275595
Cheng, Y. 2015. Single-particle cryo-EM at crystallographic resolution. Cell.
161:450–457. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2015.03.049
Cheng, Y., N. Grigorieff, P.A. Penczek, and T. Walz. 2015. A primer to singleparticle cryo-electron microscopy. Cell. 161:438–449. https://doi.org/10
.1016/j.cell.2015.03.050
Choi, I.Y., and R. Gruetter. 2003. In vivo 13C NMR assessment of brain glycogen concentration and turnover in the awake rat. Neurochem. Int. 43:
317–322. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0197-0186(03)00018-4
Chuquet, J., P. Quilichini, E.A. Nimchinsky, and G. Buzsaki. 2010. Predomi- ´
nant enhancement of glucose uptake in astrocytes versus neurons
during activation of the somatosensory cortex. J. Neurosci. 30:
15298–15303. https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0762-10.2010
Chutkow, W.A., J.C. Makielski, D.J. Nelson, C.F. Burant, and Z. Fan. 1999.
Alternative splicing of sur2 Exon 17 regulates nucleotide sensitivity of
the ATP-sensitive potassium channel. J. Biol. Chem. 274:13656–13665.
https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.274.19.13656
Cleary, C.M., T.S. Moreira, A.C. Takakura, M.T. Nelson, T.A. Longden, and
D.K. Mulkey. 2020. Vascular control of the CO2/H+-dependent drive to
breathe. Elife. 9:e59499. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.59499
Clement, J.P. IV, K. Kunjilwar, G. Gonzalez, M. Schwanstecher, U. Panten, L.
Aguilar-Bryan, and J. Bryan. 1997. Association and stoichiometry of
K(ATP) channel subunits. Neuron. 18:827–838. https://doi.org/10.1016/
S0896-6273(00)80321-9
Conti, L.R., C.M. Radeke, and C.A. Vandenberg. 2002. Membrane targeting of
ATP-sensitive potassium channel. Effects of glycosylation on surface
expression. J. Biol. Chem. 277:25416–25422. https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc
.M203109200
Cook, D.L., and C.N. Hales. 1984. Intracellular ATP directly blocks K+ channels
in pancreatic B-cells. Nature. 311:271–273. https://doi.org/10.1038/
311271a0
Crouch, E.E., A. Bhaduri, M.G. Andrews, A. Cebrian-Silla, L.N. Diafos, J.O.
Birrueta, K. Wedderburn-Pugh, E.J. Valenzuela, N.K. Bennett, U.C. Eze,
et al. 2022. Ensembles of endothelial and mural cells promote angiogenesis in prenatal human brain. Cell. 185:3753–3769.e18. https://doi
.org/10.1016/j.cell.2022.09.004
Dabertrand, F., M.T. Nelson, and J.E. Brayden. 2012. Acidosis dilates brain
parenchymal arterioles by conversion of calcium waves to sparks to
activate BK channels. Circ. Res. 110:285–294. https://doi.org/10.1161/
CIRCRESAHA.111.258145
Dabertrand, F., R.M. Hannah, J.M. Pearson, D.C. Hill-Eubanks, J.E. Brayden,
and M.T. Nelson. 2013. Prostaglandin E2, a postulated astrocyte-derived
neurovascular coupling agent, constricts rather than dilates parenchymal arterioles. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 33:479–482. https://doi
.org/10.1038/jcbfm.2013.9
Dantzler, H.A., M.P. Matott, D. Martinez, and D.D. Kline. 2019. Hydrogen
peroxide inhibits neurons in the paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus via potassium channel activation. Am. J. Physiol. Regul. Integr.
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 24 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
Comp. Physiol. 317:R121–R133. https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpregu.00054
.2019
Daut, J., N.B. Standen, and M.T. Nelson. 1994. The role of the membrane
potential of endothelial and smooth muscle cells in the regulation of
coronary blood flow. J. Cardiovasc. Electrophysiol. 5:154–181. https://doi
.org/10.1111/j.1540-8167.1994.tb01156.x
Davies, L.M., G.I. Purves, R. Barrett-Jolley, and C. Dart. 2010. Interaction with
caveolin-1 modulates vascular ATP-sensitive potassium (KATP) channel
activity. J. Physiol. 588:3255–3266. https://doi.org/10.1113/jphysiol.2010
.194779
de la Torre, J.C. 2000a. Cerebral hypoperfusion, capillary degeneration, and
development of Alzheimer disease. Alzheimer Dis. Assoc. Disord. 14:
S72–S81. https://doi.org/10.1097/00002093-200000001-00012
de la Torre, J.C. 2000b. Critically attained threshold of cerebral hypoperfusion: Can it cause Alzheimer’s disease? Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 903:
424–436. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1749-6632.2000.tb06394.x
de Matthaeis, A., A. Greco, M.P. Dagostino, G. Paroni, A. Fontana, M. Vinciguerra, G. Mazzoccoli, D. Seripa, and G. Vendemiale. 2014. Effects of
hypercapnia on peripheral vascular reactivity in elderly patients with
acute exacerbation of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Clin. Interv. Aging. 9:871–878. https://doi.org/10.2147/CIA.S57548
Deng, D., C. Xu, P. Sun, J. Wu, C. Yan, M. Hu, and N. Yan. 2014. Crystal
structure of the human glucose transporter GLUT1. Nature. 510:121–125.
https://doi.org/10.1038/nature13306
Dhar-Chowdhury, P., M.D. Harrell, S.Y. Han, D. Jankowska, L. Parachuru, A.
Morrissey, S. Srivastava, W. Liu, B. Malester, H. Yoshida, and W.A.
Coetzee. 2005. The glycolytic enzymes, glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate
dehydrogenase, triose-phosphate isomerase, and pyruvate kinase are
components of the K(ATP) channel macromolecular complex and regulate its function. J. Biol. Chem. 280:38464–38470. https://doi.org/10
.1074/jbc.M508744200
Dienel, G.A. 2012. Brain lactate metabolism: The discoveries and the controversies. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 32:1107–1138. https://doi.org/10
.1038/jcbfm.2011.175
DiNuzzo, M. 2019. How glycogen sustains brain function: A plausible allosteric signaling pathway mediated by glucose phosphates. J. Cereb. Blood
Flow Metab. 39:1452–1459. https://doi.org/10.1177/0271678X19856713
Dora, K.A., M.P. Doyle, and B.R. Duling. 1997. Elevation of intracellular calcium in smooth muscle causes endothelial cell generation of NO in
arterioles. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 94:6529–6534. https://doi.org/10
.1073/pnas.94.12.6529
Dora, K.A., J. Xia, and B.R. Duling. 2003. Endothelial cell signaling during
conducted vasomotor responses. Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol. 285:
H119–H126. https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpheart.00643.2002
Dubinsky, W.P., O. Mayorga-Wark, and S.G. Schultz. 1998. Colocalization of
glycolytic enzyme activity and KATP channels in basolateral membrane
of Necturus enterocytes. Am. J. Physiol. 275:C1653–C1659. https://doi
.org/10.1152/ajpcell.1998.275.6.C1653
Duncker, D.J., and R.J. Bache. 2008. Regulation of coronary blood flow during
exercise. Physiol. Rev. 88:1009–1086. https://doi.org/10.1152/physrev
.00045.2006
Dunn, A.K., A. Devor, A.M. Dale, and D.A. Boas. 2005. Spatial extent of
oxygen metabolism and hemodynamic changes during functional activation of the rat somatosensory cortex. Neuroimage. 27:279–290.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2005.04.024
Earley, S., and J.E. Brayden. 2015. Transient receptor potential channels in
the vasculature. Physiol. Rev. 95:645–690. https://doi.org/10.1152/
physrev.00026.2014
Eckel, R.H., K.G. Alberti, S.M. Grundy, and P.Z. Zimmet. 2010. The metabolic
syndrome. Lancet. 375:181–183. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(09)
61794-3
Edwards, G., K.A. Dora, M.J. Gardener, C.J. Garland, and A.H. Weston. 1998.
K+ is an endothelium-derived hyperpolarizing factor in rat arteries.
Nature. 396:269–272. https://doi.org/10.1038/24388
Emerson, G.G., and S.S. Segal. 2000. Endothelial cell pathway for conduction
of hyperpolarization and vasodilation along hamster feed artery. Circ.
Res. 86:94–100. https://doi.org/10.1161/01.RES.86.1.94
Emerson, G.G., and S.S. Segal. 2001. Electrical activation of endothelium
evokes vasodilation and hyperpolarization along hamster feed arteries.
Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol. 280:H160–H167. https://doi.org/10
.1152/ajpheart.2001.280.1.H160
Evans, S.W., D.-Q. Shi, M. Chavarha, M.H. Plitt, J. Taxidis, B. Madruga, J.L. Fan,
F.-J. Hwang, S.C. van Keulen, C.-M. Suomivuori, et al. 2023. A positively
tuned voltage indicator for extended electrical recordings in the brain.Nat.
Methods. 20:1104–1113. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-023-01913-z
Fan, L.-H., H.-Y. Tian, A.-Q. Ma, Z. Hu, J.-H. Huo, and Y.-X. Cao. 2008. Altered ATP-sensitive potassium channels may underscore obesitytriggered increase in blood pressure. Acta Pharmacol. Sin. 29:1167–1174.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1745-7254.2008.00810.x
Fan, L.-H., H.-Y. Tian, M.-L. Yang, A.-Q. Ma, Z. Hu, X.-J. Bai, and Y.-X. Cao.
2009. High-fat diet may impair K(ATP) channels in vascular smooth
muscle cells. Biomed. Pharmacother. 63:165–170. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.biopha.2008.01.005
Fan, J.L., J.A. Rivera, W. Sun, J. Peterson, H. Haeberle, S. Rubin, and N. Ji.
2020a. High-speed volumetric two-photon fluorescence imaging of
neurovascular dynamics. Nat. Commun. 11:6020. https://doi.org/10
.1038/s41467-020-19851-1
Fan, L.Z., S. Kheifets, U.L. Bohm, H. Wu, K.D. Piatkevich, M.E. Xie, V. Parot, ¨
Y. Ha, K.E. Evans, E.S. Boyden, et al. 2020b. All-Optical electrophysiology reveals the role of lateral inhibition in sensory processing in
cortical layer 1. Cell. 180:521–535.e18. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2020
.01.001
Fancher, I.S., E. Le Master, S.J. Ahn, C. Adamos, J.C. Lee, E. Berdyshev, R.O.
Dull, S.A. Phillips, and I. Levitan. 2020. Impairment of flow-sensitive
inwardly rectifying K+ channels via disruption of glycocalyx mediates
obesity-induced endothelial dysfunction. Arterioscler. Thromb. Vasc. Biol.
40:e240–e255. https://doi.org/10.1161/ATVBAHA.120.314935
Fernandes, C.A.H., D. Zuniga, C. Fagnen, V. Kugler, R. Scala, G. Pehau-Ar- ´
naudet, R. Wagner, D. Perahia, S. Bendahhou, and C. Venien-Bryan. ´
2022. Cryo-electron microscopy unveils unique structural features of
the human Kir2.1 channel. Sci. Adv. 8:eabq8489. https://doi.org/10.1126/
sciadv.abq8489
Fernandez-Klett, F., N. Offenhauser, U. Dirnagl, J. Priller, and U. Lindauer. ´
2010. Pericytes in capillaries are contractile in vivo, but arterioles
mediate functional hyperemia in the mouse brain. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA. 107:22290–22295. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1011321108
Figueroa, X.F., and B.R. Duling. 2009. Gap junctions in the control of vascular
function. Antioxid. Redox Signal. 11:251–266. https://doi.org/10.1089/ars
.2008.2117
Forman, H.J., M. Maiorino, and F. Ursini. 2010. Signaling functions of reactive oxygen species. Biochemistry. 49:835–842. https://doi.org/10.1021/
bi9020378
Forstermann, U. 2010. Nitric oxide and oxidative stress in vascular disease. ¨
Pflugers Arch. 459:923–939. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00424-010-0808-2
Foster, M.N., and W.A. Coetzee. 2016. KATP channels in the cardiovascular
system. Physiol. Rev. 96:177–252. https://doi.org/10.1152/physrev.00003
.2015
Fujita, A., and Y. Kurachi. 2000. Molecular aspects of ATP-sensitive K+
channels in the cardiovascular system and K+ channel openers. Pharmacol. Ther. 85:39–53. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0163-7258(99)00050-9
Garland, C.J., P. Bagher, C. Powell, X. Ye, H.A.L. Lemmey, L. Borysova, and
K.A. Dora. 2017. Voltage-dependent Ca2+ entry into smooth muscle
during contraction promotes endothelium-mediated feedback vasodilation in arterioles. Sci. Signal. 10:eaal3806. https://doi.org/10.1126/
scisignal.aal3806
Garthwaite, J. 2019. NO as a multimodal transmitter in the brain: Discovery
and current status. Br. J. Pharmacol. 176:197–211. https://doi.org/10.1111/
bph.14532
Giannitsi, S., M. Bougiakli, A. Bechlioulis, and K. Naka. 2019. Endothelial
dysfunction and heart failure: A review of the existing bibliography
with emphasis on flow mediated dilation. JRSM Cardiovasc. Dis. 8:
2048004019843047. https://doi.org/10.1177/2048004019843047
Gold, P.E., and D.L. Korol. 2012. Making memories matter. Front. Integr.
Neurosci. 6:116. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnint.2012.00116
Goldberg, I.J., C.M. Trent, and P.C. Schulze. 2012. Lipid metabolism and
toxicity in the heart. Cell Metab. 15:805–812. https://doi.org/10.1016/j
.cmet.2012.04.006
Gonçalves, L.M., M.M. Fahd Qadir, M. Boulina, M. Makhmutova, E. Pereira,
and J. Almaça. 2023. Pericyte dysfunction and impaired vasomotion are
hallmarks of islets during the pathogenesis of type 1 diabetes. Cell Reports. 42:112913. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2023.112913
Gonzales, A.L., Y. Yang, M.N. Sullivan, L. Sanders, F. Dabertrand, D.C. HillEubanks, M.T. Nelson, and S. Earley. 2014. A PLCγ1-dependent, forcesensitive signaling network in the myogenic constriction of cerebral
arteries. Sci. Signal. 7:ra49. https://doi.org/10.1126/scisignal.2004732
Gonzales, A.L., N.R. Klug, A. Moshkforoush, J.C. Lee, F.K. Lee, B. Shui, N.M.
Tsoukias, M.I. Kotlikoff, D. Hill-Eubanks, and M.T. Nelson. 2020.
Contractile pericytes determine the direction of blood flow at capillary
junctions. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 117:27022–27033. https://doi.org/10
.1073/pnas.1922755117
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 25 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
Gordon, G.R.J., H.B. Choi, R.L. Rungta, G.C.R. Ellis-Davies, and B.A. MacVicar.
2008. Brain metabolism dictates the polarity of astrocyte control over
arterioles. Nature. 456:745–749. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature07525
Gould, I.G., P. Tsai, D. Kleinfeld, and A. Linninger. 2017. The capillary bed
offers the largest hemodynamic resistance to the cortical blood
supply. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 37:52–68. https://doi.org/10.1177/
0271678X16671146
Grant, R.I., D.A. Hartmann, R.G. Underly, A.-A. Berthiaume, N.R. Bhat, and
A.Y. Shih. 2019. Organizational hierarchy and structural diversity of
microvascular pericytes in adult mouse cortex. J. Cereb. Blood Flow
Metab. 39:411–425. https://doi.org/10.1177/0271678X17732229
Greiner, J.V., and T. Glonek. 2021. Intracellular ATP concentration and implication for cellular evolution. Biology. 10:1166. https://doi.org/10
.3390/biology10111166
Gribble, F.M., G. Loussouarn, S.J. Tucker, C. Zhao, C.G. Nichols, and F.M.
Ashcroft. 2000. A novel method for measurement of submembrane
ATP concentration. J. Biol. Chem. 275:30046–30049. https://doi.org/10
.1074/jbc.M001010200
Grubb, S., C. Cai, B.O. Hald, L. Khennouf, R.P. Murmu, A.G.K. Jensen, J.
Fordsmann, S. Zambach, and M. Lauritzen. 2020. Precapillary sphincters maintain perfusion in the cerebral cortex. Nat. Commun. 11:395.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-020-14330-z
Haas, T.L., and B.R. Duling. 1997. Morphology favors an endothelial cell
pathway for longitudinal conduction within arterioles. Microvasc. Res.
53:113–120. https://doi.org/10.1006/mvre.1996.1999
Hald, B.O., and D.G. Welsh. 2020. Conceptualizing conduction as a pliant
electrical response: Impact of gap junctions and ion channels. Am.
J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol. 319:H1276–H1289. https://doi.org/10.1152/
ajpheart.00285.2020
Hall, C.N., C. Reynell, B. Gesslein, N.B. Hamilton, A. Mishra, B.A. Sutherland,
F.M. O’Farrell, A.M. Buchan, M. Lauritzen, and D. Attwell. 2014. Capillary pericytes regulate cerebral blood flow in health and disease.
Nature. 508:55–60. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature13165
Halliday, M.R., S.V. Rege, Q. Ma, Z. Zhao, C.A. Miller, E.A. Winkler, and B.V.
Zlokovic. 2016. Accelerated pericyte degeneration and blood-brain
barrier breakdown in apolipoprotein E4 carriers with Alzheimer’s
disease. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 36:216–227. https://doi.org/10.1038/
jcbfm.2015.44
Han, J., I. So, E.Y. Kim, and Y.E. Earm. 1993. ATP-sensitive potassium
channels are modulated by intracellular lactate in rabbit ventricular
myocytes. Pflugers Arch. 425:546–548. https://doi.org/10.1007/
BF00374883
Han, J., N. Kim, E. Kim, W.-K. Ho, and Y.E. Earm. 2001. Modulation of ATPsensitive potassium channels by cGMP-dependent protein kinase in
rabbit ventricular myocytes. J. Biol. Chem. 276:22140–22147. https://doi
.org/10.1074/jbc.M010103200
Hannah, R.M., K.M. Dunn, A.D. Bonev, and M.T. Nelson. 2011. Endothelial
SK(Ca) and IK(Ca) channels regulate brain parenchymal arteriolar diameter and cortical cerebral blood flow. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 31:
1175–1186. https://doi.org/10.1038/jcbfm.2010.214
Harada, K., T. Chihara, Y. Hayasaka, M. Mita, M. Takizawa, K. Ishida, M.
Arai, S. Tsuno, M. Matsumoto, T. Ishihara, et al. 2020. Green fluorescent protein-based lactate and pyruvate indicators suitable for biochemical assays and live cell imaging. Sci. Rep. 10:19562. https://doi.org/
10.1038/s41598-020-76440-4
Hariharan, A., N. Weir, C. Robertson, L. He, C. Betsholtz, and T.A. Longden.
2020. The ion channel and GPCR toolkit of brain capillary pericytes.
Front. Cell. Neurosci. 14:601324. https://doi.org/10.3389/fncel.2020
.601324
Hariharan, A., C.D. Robertson, D.C.G. Garcia, and T.A. Longden. 2022. Brain
capillary pericytes are metabolic sentinels that control blood flow
through a KATP channel-dependent energy switch. Cell Rep. 41:111872.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2022.111872
Harraz, O.F., R.R. Abd El-Rahman, K. Bigdely-Shamloo, S.M. Wilson, S.E.
Brett, M. Romero, A.L. Gonzales, S. Earley, E.J. Vigmond, A. Nygren,
et al. 2014. Ca(V)3.2 channels and the induction of negative feedback in
cerebral arteries. Circ. Res. 115:650–661. https://doi.org/10.1161/
CIRCRESAHA.114.304056
Harraz, O.F., T.A. Longden, F. Dabertrand, D. Hill-Eubanks, and M.T. Nelson.
2018a. Endothelial GqPCR activity controls capillary electrical signaling
and brain blood flow through PIP2 depletion. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA.
115:E3569–E3577. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1800201115
Harraz, O.F., T.A. Longden, D. Hill-Eubanks, and M.T. Nelson. 2018b. PIP2
depletion promotes TRPV4 channel activity in mouse brain capillary
endothelial cells. Elife. 7:e38689. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.38689
Harraz, O.F., D. Hill-Eubanks, and M.T. Nelson. 2020. PIP2: A critical regulator of vascular ion channels hiding in plain sight. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA. 117:20378–20389. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2006737117
Harraz, O.F., N.R. Klug, A.J. Senatore, D.C. Hill-Eubanks, and M.T. Nelson. 2022. Piezo1 is a mechanosensor channel in central nervous
system capillaries. Circ. Res. 130:1531–1546. https://doi.org/10.1161/
CIRCRESAHA.122.320827
Hartmann, D.A., A.-A. Berthiaume, R.I. Grant, S.A. Harrill, T. Koski, T. Tieu,
K.P. McDowell, A.V. Faino, A.L. Kelly, and A.Y. Shih. 2021. Brain capillary pericytes exert a substantial but slow influence on blood flow.
Nat. Neurosci. 24:633–645. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41593-020-00793-2
Harvey, W. 1957. Movement of the Heart and Blood in Animals. Blackwell
Scientific, Oxford, UK.
Hayabuchi, Y., C. Dart, and N.B. Standen. 2001. Evidence for involvement of
A-kinase anchoring protein in activation of rat arterial K(ATP) channels
by protein kinase A. J. Physiol. 536:421–427. https://doi.org/10.1111/j
.1469-7793.2001.0421c.xd
He, Y.Y., S.J. Yu, Y. Cui, and P. Du. 2010. Morphological study on microvasculature of left ventricular wall in infant and adult yaks. Anat. Rec.
293:1519–1526. https://doi.org/10.1002/ar.21201
He, L., M. Vanlandewijck, M.A. Mae, J. Andrae, K. Ando, F. Del Gaudio, K. ¨
Nahar, T. Lebouvier, B. Laviña, L. Gouveia, et al. 2018. Single-cell RNA
sequencing of mouse brain and lung vascular and vessel-associated cell
types. Sci. Data. 5:180160. https://doi.org/10.1038/sdata.2018.160
Hein, T.W., W. Xu, and L. Kuo. 2006. Dilation of retinal arterioles in response
to lactate: Role of nitric oxide, guanylyl cyclase, and ATP-sensitive
potassium channels. Invest. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 47:693–699. https://
doi.org/10.1167/iovs.05-1224
Heintz, A., T. Koch, and A. Deussen. 2005. Intact nitric oxide production is
obligatory for the sustained flow response during hypercapnic acidosis
in guinea pig heart. Cardiovasc. Res. 66:55–63. https://doi.org/10.1016/j
.cardiores.2004.12.001
Hellsten, Y., D. Maclean, G. Radegran, B. Saltin, and J. Bangsbo. 1998. Ade- ˚
nosine concentrations in the interstitium of resting and contracting
human skeletal muscle. Circulation. 98:6–8. https://doi.org/10.1161/01
.CIR.98.1.6
Heppner, T.J., A.D. Bonev, L.F. Santana, and M.T. Nelson. 2002. Alkaline pH
shifts Ca2+ sparks to Ca2+ waves in smooth muscle cells of pressurized
cerebral arteries. Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol. 283:H2169–H2176.
https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpheart.00603.2002
Hibino, H., A. Inanobe, K. Furutani, S. Murakami, I. Findlay, and Y. Kurachi.
2010. Inwardly rectifying potassium channels: Their structure, function, and physiological roles. Physiol. Rev. 90:291–366. https://doi.org/10
.1152/physrev.00021.2009
Hilgemann, D.W., and R. Ball. 1996. Regulation of cardiac Na+,Ca2+ exchange
and KATP potassium channels by PIP2. Science. 273:956–959. https://doi
.org/10.1126/science.273.5277.956
Hill, R.A., L. Tong, P. Yuan, S. Murikinati, S. Gupta, and J. Grutzendler. 2015.
Regional blood flow in the normal and ischemic brain is controlled by
arteriolar smooth muscle cell contractility and not by capillary pericytes. Neuron. 87:95–110. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2015.06.001
Hille, B., E.J. Dickson, M. Kruse, O. Vivas, and B.-C. Suh. 2015. Phosphoinositides regulate ion channels. Biochim. Biophys. Acta. 1851:844–856.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbalip.2014.09.010
Hirode, G., and R.J. Wong. 2020. Trends in the prevalence of metabolic
syndrome in the United States, 2011–2016. JAMA. 323:2526–2528.
https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2020.4501
Ho, T., E. Potapenko, D.B. Davis, and M.J. Merrins. 2023. A plasma
membrane-associated glycolytic metabolon is functionally coupled to
KATP channels in pancreatic α and β cells from humans and mice. Cell
Rep. 42:112394. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2023.112394
Hong, M., E. Kefaloyianni, L. Bao, B. Malester, D. Delaroche, T.A. Neubert,
and W.A. Coetzee. 2011. Cardiac ATP-sensitive K+ channel associates
with the glycolytic enzyme complex. FASEB J. 25:2456–2467. https://doi
.org/10.1096/fj.10-176669
Hori, M., and M. Kitakaze. 1991. Adenosine, the heart, and coronary circulation. Hypertension. 18:565–574. https://doi.org/10.1161/01.HYP.18.5
.565
Horie, M., H. Irisawa, and A. Noma. 1987. Voltage-dependent magnesium
block of adenosine-triphosphate-sensitive potassium channel in
guinea-pig ventricular cells. J. Physiol. 387:251–272. https://doi.org/10
.1113/jphysiol.1987.sp016572
Hosford, P.S., J.A. Wells, S. Nizari, I.N. Christie, S.M. Theparambil, P.A.
Castro, A. Hadjihambi, L.F. Barros, I. Ruminot, M.F. Lythgoe, and A.V.
Gourine. 2022. CO2 signaling mediates neurovascular coupling in the
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 26 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
cerebral cortex. Nat. Commun. 13:2125. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467
-022-29622-9
Hu, Y., and G.S. Wilson. 1997a. Rapid changes in local extracellular rat brain
glucose observed with an in vivo glucose sensor. J. Neurochem. 68:
1745–1752. https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1471-4159.1997.68041745.x
Hu, Y., and G.S. Wilson. 1997b. A temporary local energy pool coupled to
neuronal activity: Fluctuations of extracellular lactate levels in rat brain
monitored with rapid-response enzyme-based sensor. J. Neurochem. 69:
1484–1490. https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1471-4159.1997.69041484.x
Hu, X., and E. Yacoub. 2012. The story of the initial dip in fMRI. Neuroimage.
62:1103–1108. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012.03.005
Huang, Y., D. Hu, C. Huang, and C.G. Nichols. 2019. Genetic discovery of ATPsensitive K+ channels in cardiovascular diseases. Circ. Arrhythm. Electrophysiol. 12:e007322. https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCEP.119.007322
Inagaki, N., T. Gonoi, J.P. Clement IV, N. Namba, J. Inazawa, G. Gonzalez, L.
Aguilar-Bryan, S. Seino, and J. Bryan. 1995. Reconstitution of IKATP: An
inward rectifier subunit plus the sulfonylurea receptor. Science. 270:
1166–1170. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.270.5239.1166
Inagaki, N., T. Gonoi, and S. Seino. 1997. Subunit stoichiometry of the pancreatic β-cell ATP-sensitive K+ channel. FEBS Lett. 409:232–236. https://
doi.org/10.1016/S0014-5793(97)00488-2
Iturria-Medina, Y., R.C. Sotero, P.J. Toussaint, J.M. Mateos-Perez, A.C. Evans, ´
M.W. Weiner, P. Aisen, R. Petersen, C.R. Jack, W. Jagust, et al. 2016.
Early role of vascular dysregulation on late-onset Alzheimer’s disease
based on multifactorial data-driven analysis. Nat. Commun. 7:11934.
https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms11934
Jackson, W.F. 2016. Arteriolar oxygen reactivity: Where is the sensor and
what is the mechanism of action? J. Physiol. 594:5055–5077. https://doi
.org/10.1113/JP270192
Jackson, W.F. 2017. Potassium channels in regulation of vascular smooth
muscle contraction and growth. Adv. Pharmacol. 78:89–144. https://doi
.org/10.1016/bs.apha.2016.07.001
Jackson, W.F. 2022. Endothelial ion channels and cell-cell communication in
the microcirculation. Front. Physiol. 13:805149. https://doi.org/10.3389/
fphys.2022.805149
Jaggar, J.H. 2001. Intravascular pressure regulates local and global Ca(2+)
signaling in cerebral artery smooth muscle cells. Am. J. Physiol. Cell
Physiol. 281:C439–C448. https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpcell.2001.281.2.C439
Jaggar, J.H., V.A. Porter, W.J. Lederer, and M.T. Nelson. 2000. Calcium sparks
in smooth muscle. Am. J. Physiol. Cell Physiol. 278:C235–C256. https://doi
.org/10.1152/ajpcell.2000.278.2.C235
Jenkins, C.M., J. Yang, H.F. Sims, and R.W. Gross. 2011. Reversible high affinity inhibition of phosphofructokinase-1 by acyl-CoA: A mechanism
integrating glycolytic flux with lipid metabolism. J. Biol. Chem. 286:
11937–11950. https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M110.203661
Jovanovic, S., Q. Du, R.M. Crawford, G.R. Budas, I. Stagljar, and A. Jovanovi ´ c. ´
2005. Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase serves as an accessory protein of the cardiac sarcolemmal K(ATP) channel. EMBO Rep. 6:
848–852. https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.embor.7400489
Karagiannis, A., T. Gallopin, A. Lacroix, F. Plaisier, J. Piquet, H. Geoffroy, R.
Hepp, J. Naude, B. Le Gac, R. Egger, et al. 2021. Lactate is an energy ´
substrate for rodent cortical neurons and enhances their firing activity.
Elife. 10:e71424. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.71424
Kasischke, K.A., H.D. Vishwasrao, P.J. Fisher, W.R. Zipfel, and W.W. Webb.
2004. Neural activity triggers neuronal oxidative metabolism followed
by astrocytic glycolysis. Science. 305:99–103. https://doi.org/10.1126/
science.1096485
Kawano, T., V. Zoga, M. Kimura, M.-Y. Liang, H.-E. Wu, G. Gemes, J.B.
McCallum, W.-M. Kwok, Q.H. Hogan, and C.D. Sarantopoulos. 2009.
Nitric oxide activates ATP-sensitive potassium channels in mammalian
sensory neurons: Action by direct S-nitrosylation. Mol. Pain. 5:12.
https://doi.org/10.1186/1744-8069-5-12
Kim, D.-S., T.Q. Duong, and S.-G. Kim. 2000. High-resolution mapping of isoorientation columns by fMRI. Nat. Neurosci. 3:164–169. https://doi.org/
10.1038/72109
Kirst, C., S. Skriabine, A. Vieites-Prado, T. Topilko, P. Bertin, G. Gerschenfeld,
F. Verny, P. Topilko, N. Michalski, M. Tessier-Lavigne, and N. Renier.
2020. Mapping the fine-scale organization and plasticity of the brain
vasculature. Cell. 180:780–795.e25. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2020
.01.028
Klug, N.R., M. Sancho, A.L. Gonzales, T.J. Heppner, R.I.C. O’Brien, D. HillEubanks, and M.T. Nelson. 2023. Intraluminal pressure elevates intracellular calcium and contracts CNS pericytes: Role of voltage-dependent
calcium channels. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 120:e2216421120. https://doi
.org/10.1073/pnas.2216421120
Knot, H.J., and M.T. Nelson. 1995. Regulation of membrane potential and
diameter by voltage-dependent K+ channels in rabbit myogenic cerebral
arteries. Am. J. Physiol. 269:H348–H355. https://doi.org/10.1152/
ajpheart.1995.269.1.H348
Knot, H.J., and M.T. Nelson. 1998. Regulation of arterial diameter and wall
[Ca2+] in cerebral arteries of rat by membrane potential and intravascular pressure. J. Physiol. 508:199–209. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469
-7793.1998.199br.x
Kotecha, N., and M.A. Hill. 2005. Myogenic contraction in rat skeletal muscle
arterioles: Smooth muscle membrane potential and Ca(2+) signaling.
Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol. 289:H1326–H1334. https://doi.org/10
.1152/ajpheart.00323.2005
Krucker, T., A. Lang, and E.P. Meyer. 2006. New polyurethane-based material for vascular corrosion casting with improved physical and
imaging characteristics. Microsc. Res. Tech. 69:138–147. https://doi.org/
10.1002/jemt.20263
Kubo, Y., and Y. Murata. 2001. Control of rectification and permeation by two
distinct sites after the second transmembrane region in Kir2.1 K+
channel. J. Physiol. 531:645–660. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-7793.2001
.0645h.x
Kubo, M., Y. Nakaya, S. Matsuoka, K. Saito, and Y. Kuroda. 1994. Atrial natriuretic factor and isosorbide dinitrate modulate the gating of ATPsensitive K+ channels in cultured vascular smooth muscle cells. Circ. Res.
74:471–476. https://doi.org/10.1161/01.RES.74.3.471
Lamb, T.W., M.M. Cebrik, J.S. Kaiser, C.F. Belanger Jr., A.B. Munro, and A.B.
Munro. 1966. Skeletal muscle blood flow during hypercapnic hyperventilation. Respir. Physiol. 1:249–257. https://doi.org/10.1016/0034
-5687(66)90044-2
Lamb, I.R., N.M. Novielli, and C.L. Murrant. 2018. Capillary response to
skeletal muscle contraction: Evidence that redundancy between vasodilators is physiologically relevant during active hyperaemia. J. Physiol.
596:1357–1372. https://doi.org/10.1113/JP275467
Larcombe-McDouall, J., N. Buttell, N. Harrison, and S. Wray. 1999. In vivo pH
and metabolite changes during a single contraction in rat uterine
smooth muscle. J. Physiol. 518:783–790. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469
-7793.1999.0783p.x
Lederer, W.J., H. Cheng, L.F. Santana, A.M. Gomez, T.B. Rogers, M.B. Cannell,
M. Rubart, and M.T. Nelson. 1996. Molecular understanding of
excitation-contraction coupling and vascular flow control in heart
muscle. In Tissue Oxygen Deprivation: From Molecular to Integrated
Function. G.G. Haddad and G. Lister, editors. Taylor & Francis, New
York. 497–513.
Ledo, A., E. Fernandes, A. Salvador, J. Laranjinha, and R.M. Barbosa. 2022. In
vivo hydrogen peroxide diffusivity in brain tissue supports volume
signaling activity. Redox Biol. 50:102250. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.redox
.2022.102250
Ledoux, J., M.S. Taylor, A.D. Bonev, R.M. Hannah, V. Solodushko, B. Shui, Y.
Tallini, M.I. Kotlikoff, and M.T. Nelson. 2008. Functional architecture
of inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate signaling in restricted spaces of myoendothelial projections. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 105:9627–9632.
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0801963105
Lee, K.P.K., J. Chen, and R. MacKinnon. 2017. Molecular structure of human
KATP in complex with ATP and ADP. Elife. 6:e32481. https://doi.org/10
.7554/eLife.32481
Lee, M.D., C. Wilson, C.D. Saunter, C. Kennedy, J.M. Girkin, and J.G.
McCarron. 2018. Spatially structured cell populations process multiple
sensory signals in parallel in intact vascular endothelium. Sci. Signal. 11:
eaar4411. https://doi.org/10.1126/scisignal.aar4411
Lennicke, C., J. Rahn, R. Lichtenfels, L.A. Wessjohann, and B. Seliger. 2015.
Hydrogen peroxide: Production, fate and role in redox signaling of
tumor cells. Cell Commun. Signal. 13:39. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12964
-015-0118-6
Li, N., J.-X. Wu, D. Ding, J. Cheng, N. Gao, and L. Chen. 2017. Structure of a
pancreatic ATP-sensitive potassium channel. Cell. 168:101–110.e10.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2016.12.028
Li, H., C. Guglielmetti, Y.J. Sei, M. Zilberter, L.M. Le Page, L. Shields, J. Yang,
K. Nguyen, B. Tiret, X. Gao, et al. 2023. Neurons require glucose uptake
and glycolysis in vivo. Cell Rep. 42:112335. https://doi.org/10.1016/j
.celrep.2023.112335
Lindauer, U., A. Kunz, S. Schuh-Hofer, J. Vogt, J.P. Dreier, and U. Dirnagl.
2001a. Nitric oxide from perivascular nerves modulates cerebral arterial pH reactivity. Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol. 281:H1353–H1363.
https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpheart.2001.281.3.H1353
Lindauer, U., G. Royl, C. Leithner, M. Kühl, L. Gold, J. Gethmann, M. KohlBareis, A. Villringer, and U. Dirnagl. 2001b. No evidence for early
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 27 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
decrease in blood oxygenation in rat whisker cortex in response to
functional activation. Neuroimage. 13:988–1001. https://doi.org/10
.1006/nimg.2000.0709
Liss, B., and J. Roeper. 2001. Molecular physiology of neuronal K-ATP
channels (review). Mol. Membr. Biol. 18:117–127. https://doi.org/10.1080/
09687680110047373
Little, T.L., E.C. Beyer, and B.R. Duling. 1995a. Connexin 43 and connexin 40
gap junctional proteins are present in arteriolar smooth muscle and
endothelium in vivo. Am. J. Physiol. 268:H729–H739. https://doi.org/10
.1152/ajpheart.1995.268.2.H729
Little, T.L., J. Xia, and B.R. Duling. 1995b. Dye tracers define differential endothelial and smooth muscle coupling patterns within the arteriolar
wall. Circ. Res. 76:498–504. https://doi.org/10.1161/01.RES.76.3.498
Litvinukov ˇ a, M., C. Talavera-López, H. Maatz, D. Reichart, C.L. Worth, E.L. ´
Lindberg, M. Kanda, K. Polanski, M. Heinig, M. Lee, et al. 2020. Cells of
the adult human heart. Nature. 588:466–472. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41586-020-2797-4
Logothetis, N. 2000. Can current fMRI techniques reveal the microarchitecture of cortex? Nat. Neurosci. 3:413–414. https://doi.org/10
.1038/74768
Longden, T.A., and M.T. Nelson. 2015. Vascular inward rectifier K+ channels
as external K+ sensors in the control of cerebral blood flow. Microcirculation. 22:183–196. https://doi.org/10.1111/micc.12190
Longden, T.A., F. Dabertrand, D.C. Hill-Eubanks, S.E. Hammack, and M.T.
Nelson. 2014. Stress-induced glucocorticoid signaling remodels neurovascular coupling through impairment of cerebrovascular inwardly
rectifying K+ channel function. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 111:7462–7467.
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1401811111
Longden, T.A., F. Dabertrand, M. Koide, A.L. Gonzales, N.R. Tykocki, J.E.
Brayden, D. Hill-Eubanks, and M.T. Nelson. 2017. Capillary K+-sensing
initiates retrograde hyperpolarization to increase local cerebral blood
flow. Nat. Neurosci. 20:717–726. https://doi.org/10.1038/nn.4533
Longden, T.A., A. Mughal, G.W. Hennig, O.F. Harraz, B. Shui, F.K. Lee, J.C.
Lee, S. Reining, M.I. Kotlikoff, G.M. Konig, et al. 2021. Local IP ¨ 3
receptor-mediated Ca2+ signals compound to direct blood flow in brain
capillaries. Sci. Adv. 7:eabh0101. https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.abh0101
Longden, T.A., G. Zhao, A. Hariharan, and W.J. Lederer. 2023. Pericytes and
the control of blood flow in brain and heart. Annu. Rev. Physiol. 85:
137–164. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-physiol-031522-034807
López-Ot´ın, C., M.A. Blasco, L. Partridge, M. Serrano, and G. Kroemer. 2023.
Hallmarks of aging: An expanding universe. Cell. 186:243–278. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2022.11.001
Lu, Z., and R. MacKinnon. 1994. Electrostatic tuning of Mg2+ affinity in an
inward-rectifier K+ channel. Nature. 371:243–246. https://doi.org/10
.1038/371243a0
Lu, T., D. Ye, X. Wang, J.M. Seubert, J.P. Graves, J.A. Bradbury, D.C. Zeldin,
and H.-C. Lee. 2006. Cardiac and vascular KATP channels in rats are
activated by endogenous epoxyeicosatrienoic acids through different
mechanisms. J. Physiol. 575:627–644. https://doi.org/10.1113/jphysiol
.2006.113985
Lundgaard, I., B. Li, L. Xie, H. Kang, S. Sanggaard, J.D.R. Haswell, W. Sun, S.
Goldman, S. Blekot, M. Nielsen, et al. 2015. Direct neuronal glucose
uptake heralds activity-dependent increases in cerebral metabolism.
Nat. Commun. 6:6807. https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms7807
Lyons, D.G., A. Parpaleix, M. Roche, and S. Charpak. 2016. Mapping oxygen
concentration in the awake mouse brain. Elife. 5:e12024. https://doi
.org/10.7554/eLife.12024
Ma, Y., M.A. Shaik, S.H. Kim, M.G. Kozberg, D.N. Thibodeaux, H.T. Zhao, H.
Yu, and E.M.C. Hillman. 2016. Wide-field optical mapping of neural
activity and brain haemodynamics: Considerations and novel approaches. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 371:20150360. https://doi
.org/10.1098/rstb.2015.0360
MacGregor, G.G., K. Dong, C.G. Vanoye, L. Tang, G. Giebisch, and S.C. Hebert.
2002. Nucleotides and phospholipids compete for binding to the C
terminus of KATP channels. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 99:2726–2731.
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.042688899
Majmundar, A.J., W.J. Wong, and M.C. Simon. 2010. Hypoxia-inducible factors and the response to hypoxic stress. Mol. Cell. 40:294–309. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2010.09.022
Martin, G.M., C. Yoshioka, E.A. Rex, J.F. Fay, Q. Xie, M.R. Whorton, J.Z. Chen,
and S.-L. Shyng. 2017. Cryo-EM structure of the ATP-sensitive potassium channel illuminates mechanisms of assembly and gating. Elife. 6:
e24149. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.24149
Mart´ınez-François, J.R., M.C. Fernandez-Agüera, N. Nathwani, C. Lahmann, ´
V.L. Burnham, N.N. Danial, and G. Yellen. 2018. BAD and KATP channels
regulate neuron excitability and epileptiform activity. Elife. 7:e32721.
https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.32721
Masia, R., D.D. De Leon, C. MacMullen, H. McKnight, C.A. Stanley, and C.G.
Nichols. 2007. A mutation in the TMD0-L0 region of sulfonylurea
receptor-1 (L225P) causes permanent neonatal diabetes mellitus
(PNDM). Diabetes. 56:1357–1362. https://doi.org/10.2337/db06-1746
Masoud, G.N., and W. Li. 2015. HIF-1α pathway: Role, regulation and intervention for cancer therapy. Acta Pharm. Sin. B. 5:378–389. https://doi
.org/10.1016/j.apsb.2015.05.007
Matoba, T., H. Shimokawa, M. Nakashima, Y. Hirakawa, Y. Mukai, K. Hirano,
H. Kanaide, and A. Takeshita. 2000. Hydrogen peroxide is an
endothelium-derived hyperpolarizing factor in mice. J. Clin. Invest. 106:
1521–1530. https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI10506
Matsuno-Yagi, A., and Y. Hatefi. 1988. Estimation of the turnover number of
bovine heart F0F1 complexes for ATP synthesis. Biochemistry. 27:
335–340. https://doi.org/10.1021/bi00401a050
McCarron, J.G., and W. Halpern. 1990. Potassium dilates rat cerebral arteries
by two independent mechanisms. Am. J. Physiol. 259:H902–H908.
https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpheart.1990.259.3.H902
McCarron, J.G., M.D. Lee, and C. Wilson. 2017. The endothelium solves
problems that endothelial cells do not know exist. Trends Pharmacol. Sci.
38:322–338. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tips.2017.01.008
McClenaghan, C., A. Hanson, M. Sala-Rabanal, H.I. Roessler, D. Josifova, D.K.
Grange, G. van Haaften, and C.G. Nichols. 2018. Cantu syndromeassociated SUR2 (ABCC9) mutations in distinct structural domains result in KATP channel gain-of-function by differential mechanisms.
J. Biol. Chem. 293:2041–2052. https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.RA117.000351
McConell, G.K., G.D. Wadley, K. Le Plastrier, and K.C. Linden. 2020. Skeletal
muscle AMPK is not activated during 2 h of moderate intensity exercise
at ∼65% [Formula: See text] in endurance trained men. J. Physiol. 598:
3859–3870. https://doi.org/10.1113/JP277619
McGahren, E.D., J.M. Beach, and B.R. Duling. 1998. Capillaries demonstrate
changes in membrane potential in response to pharmacological stimuli.
Am. J. Physiol. 274:H60–H65. https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpheart.1998.274.1
.H60
McNay, E.C., and P.E. Gold. 2001. Age-related differences in hippocampal
extracellular fluid glucose concentration during behavioral testing and
following systemic glucose administration. J. Gerontol. A. Biol. Sci. Med.
Sci. 56:B66–B71. https://doi.org/10.1093/gerona/56.2.B66
McNay, E.C., R.C. McCarty, and P.E. Gold. 2001. Fluctuations in brain glucose
concentration during behavioral testing: Dissociations between brain
areas and between brain and blood. Neurobiol. Learn. Mem. 75:325–337.
https://doi.org/10.1006/nlme.2000.3976
Meng, G., J. Zhong, Q. Zhang, J.S.J. Wong, J. Wu, K.K. Tsia, and N. Ji. 2022.
Ultrafast two-photon fluorescence imaging of cerebral blood circulation
in the mouse brain in vivo. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 119:e2117346119.
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2117346119
Mercado, J., R. Baylie, M.F. Navedo, C. Yuan, J.D. Scott, M.T. Nelson, J.E.
Brayden, and L.F. Santana. 2014. Local control of TRPV4 channels by
AKAP150-targeted PKC in arterial smooth muscle. J. Gen. Physiol. 143:
559–575. https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.201311050
Mergenthaler, P., U. Lindauer, G.A. Dienel, and A. Meisel. 2013. Sugar for the
brain: The role of glucose in physiological and pathological brain
function. Trends Neurosci. 36:587–597. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tins
.2013.07.001
Metallo, C.M., and M.G. Vander Heiden. 2013. Understanding metabolic
regulation and its influence on cell physiology. Mol. Cell. 49:388–398.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2013.01.018
Miodonski, A., and A. Jasi ´ nski. 1979. Scanning electron microscopy of mi- ´
crocorrosion casts of the vascular bed in the skin of the spotted salamander, Salamandra salamandra L. Cell Tissue Res. 196:153–162. https://
doi.org/10.1007/BF00236356
Mironova, G.Y., P.M. Kowalewska, M. El-Lakany, C.H.T. Tran, M. Sancho, A.
Zechariah, W.F. Jackson, and D.G. Welsh. 2023. The conducted vasomotor response and the principles of electrical communication in resistance arteries. Physiol. Rev. In press.
Mita, M., M. Ito, K. Harada, I. Sugawara, H. Ueda, T. Tsuboi, and T. Kitaguchi.
2019. Green fluorescent protein-based glucose indicators report glucose
dynamics in living cells. Anal. Chem. 91:4821–4830. https://doi.org/10
.1021/acs.analchem.9b00447
Moshkforoush, A., B. Ashenagar, O.F. Harraz, F. Dabertrand, T.A. Longden,
M.T. Nelson, and N.M. Tsoukias. 2020. The capillary Kir channel as
sensor and amplifier of neuronal signals: Modeling insights on K+-
mediated neurovascular communication. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 117:
16626–16637. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2000151117
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 28 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
Mufti, R.E., S.E. Brett, C.H.T. Tran, R. Abd El-Rahman, Y. Anfinogenova, A.
El-Yazbi, W.C. Cole, P.P. Jones, S.R.W. Chen, and D.G. Welsh. 2010.
Intravascular pressure augments cerebral arterial constriction by inducing voltage-insensitive Ca2+ waves. J. Physiol. 588:3983–4005.
https://doi.org/10.1113/jphysiol.2010.193300
Murphy, M.E., and J.E. Brayden. 1995. Nitric oxide hyperpolarizes rabbit
mesenteric arteries via ATP-sensitive potassium channels. J. Physiol.
486:47–58. https://doi.org/10.1113/jphysiol.1995.sp020789
Nelson, M.T., and J.M. Quayle. 1995. Physiological roles and properties of
potassium channels in arterial smooth muscle. Am. J. Physiol. 268:
C799–C822. https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpcell.1995.268.4.C799
Nelson, M.T., H. Cheng, M. Rubart, L.F. Santana, A.D. Bonev, H.J. Knot, and
W.J. Lederer. 1995. Relaxation of arterial smooth muscle by calcium
sparks. Science. 270:633–637. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.270.5236
.633
Nichols, C.G. 2006. KATP channels as molecular sensors of cellular metabolism. Nature. 440:470–476. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature04711
Nichols, C.G., and W.J. Lederer. 1990. The regulation of ATP-sensitive K+
channel activity in intact and permeabilized rat ventricular myocytes.
J. Physiol. 423:91–110. https://doi.org/10.1113/jphysiol.1990.sp018013
Nickenig, G., and D.G. Harrison. 2002. The AT(1)-type angiotensin receptor in
oxidative stress and atherogenesis: Part I: Oxidative stress and atherogenesis. Circulation. 105:393–396. https://doi.org/10.1161/hc0302.102618
Noma, A. 1983. ATP-regulated K+ channels in cardiac muscle. Nature. 305:
147–148. https://doi.org/10.1038/305147a0
Norman, J.N., J. MacIntyre, J.R. Shearer Jr., I.M. Craigen, and G. Smith. 1970.
Effect of carbon dioxide on renal blood flow. Am. J. Physiol. 219:672–676.
https://doi.org/10.1152/ajplegacy.1970.219.3.672
Nose, K. 2000. Role of reactive oxygen species in the regulation of physiological functions. Biol. Pharm. Bull. 23:897–903. https://doi.org/10.1248/
bpb.23.897
Obel, L.F., M.S. Müller, A.B. Walls, H.M. Sickmann, L.K. Bak, H.S. Waagepetersen, and A. Schousboe. 2012. Brain glycogen-new perspectives on
its metabolic function and regulation at the subcellular level. Front.
Neuroenergetics. 4:3. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnene.2012.00003
Offenhauser, N., K. Thomsen, K. Caesar, and M. Lauritzen. 2005. Activityinduced tissue oxygenation changes in rat cerebellar cortex: Interplay
of postsynaptic activation and blood flow. J. Physiol. 565:279–294.
https://doi.org/10.1113/jphysiol.2005.082776
Ornelas, S., A.-A. Berthiaume, S.K. Bonney, V. Coelho-Santos, R.G. Underly,
A. Kremer, C.J. Guerin, S. Lippens, and A.Y. Shih. 2021. Three- ´
dimensional ultrastructure of the brain pericyte-endothelial interface.
J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 41:2185–2200. https://doi.org/10.1177/
0271678X211012836
Ottolini, M., K. Hong, E.L. Cope, Z. Daneva, L.J. DeLalio, J.D. Sokolowski, C.
Marziano, N.Y. Nguyen, J. Altschmied, J. Haendeler, et al. 2020. Local
peroxynitrite impairs endothelial transient receptor potential vanilloid
4 channels and elevates blood pressure in obesity. Circulation. 141:
1318–1333. https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.119.043385
Owen, M.K., F.A. Witzmann, M.L. McKenney, X. Lai, Z.C. Berwick, S.P.
Moberly, M. Alloosh, M. Sturek, and J.D. Tune. 2013. Perivascular adipose tissue potentiates contraction of coronary vascular smooth muscle: Influence of obesity. Circulation. 128:9–18. https://doi.org/10.1161/
CIRCULATIONAHA.112.001238
Oz, G., P.G. Henry, E.R. Seaquist, and R. Gruetter. 2003. Direct, noninvasive ¨
measurement of brain glycogen metabolism in humans. Neurochem. Int.
43:323–329. https://doi.org/10.1016/s0197-0186(03)00019-6
Oz, G., E.R. Seaquist, A. Kumar, A.B. Criego, L.E. Benedict, J.P. Rao, P.-G. ¨
Henry, P.F. Van De Moortele, and R. Gruetter. 2007. Human brain
glycogen content and metabolism: Implications on its role in brain
energy metabolism. Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab. 292:E946–E951.
https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpendo.00424.2006
Oz, G., M. DiNuzzo, A. Kumar, A. Moheet, and E.R. Seaquist. 2015. Revisiting ¨
glycogen content in the human brain. Neurochem. Res. 40:2473–2481.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11064-015-1664-4
Parpaleix, A., Y. Goulam Houssen, and S. Charpak. 2013. Imaging local neuronal activity by monitoring PO₂ transients in capillaries. Nat. Med. 19:
241–246. https://doi.org/10.1038/nm.3059
Patel, S., and S. Sharma. 2023. Respiratory acidosis. In StatPearls. StatPearls
Publishing, Treasure Island, FL.
Patel, A.B., J.C. Lai, G.M. Chowdhury, F. Hyder, D.L. Rothman, R.G. Shulman,
and K.L. Behar. 2014. Direct evidence for activity-dependent glucose
phosphorylation in neurons with implications for the astrocyte-toneuron lactate shuttle. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 111:5385–5390. https://
doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1403576111
Pellerin, L., and P.J. Magistretti. 1994. Glutamate uptake into astrocytes
stimulates aerobic glycolysis: A mechanism coupling neuronal activity
to glucose utilization. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 91:10625–10629. https://
doi.org/10.1073/pnas.91.22.10625
Peng, W., C. Tan, L. Mo, J. Jiang, W. Zhou, J. Du, X. Zhou, X. Liu, and L. Chen.
2021. Glucose transporter 3 in neuronal glucose metabolism: Health and
diseases. Metabolism. 123:154869. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.metabol.2021
.154869
Pipatpolkai, T., R.A. Corey, P. Proks, F.M. Ashcroft, and P.J. Stansfeld. 2020.
Evaluating inositol phospholipid interactions with inward rectifier
potassium channels and characterising their role in disease. Commun.
Chem. 3:147. https://doi.org/10.1038/s42004-020-00391-0
Porter, V.A., A.D. Bonev, H.J. Knot, T.J. Heppner, A.S. Stevenson, T. Kleppisch, W.J. Lederer, and M.T. Nelson. 1998. Frequency modulation of
Ca2+ sparks is involved in regulation of arterial diameter by cyclic
nucleotides. Am. J. Physiol. 274:C1346–C1355. https://doi.org/10.1152/
ajpcell.1998.274.5.C1346
Pratt, E.B., Q. Zhou, J.W. Gay, and S.L. Shyng. 2012. Engineered interaction between SUR1 and Kir6.2 that enhances ATP sensitivity in KATP
channels. J. Gen. Physiol. 140:175–187. https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp
.201210803
Prichard, J., D. Rothman, E. Novotny, O. Petroff, T. Kuwabara, M. Avison, A.
Howseman, C. Hanstock, and R. Shulman. 1991. Lactate rise detected by
1H NMR in human visual cortex during physiologic stimulation. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 88:5829–5831. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.88.13
.5829
Proks, P., H. de Wet, and F.M. Ashcroft. 2010. Activation of the K(ATP)
channel by Mg-nucleotide interaction with SUR1. J. Gen. Physiol. 136:
389–405. https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.201010475
Proks, P., H. de Wet, and F.M. Ashcroft. 2014. Sulfonylureas suppress the
stimulatory action of Mg-nucleotides on Kir6.2/SUR1 but not Kir6.2/
SUR2A KATP channels: A mechanistic study. J. Gen. Physiol. 144:
469–486. https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.201411222
Quinn, K.V., Y. Cui, J.P. Giblin, L.H. Clapp, and A. Tinker. 2003. Do anionic
phospholipids serve as cofactors or second messengers for the regulation of activity of cloned ATP-sensitive K+ channels? Circ. Res. 93:
646–655. https://doi.org/10.1161/01.RES.0000095247.81449.8E
Quistorff, B., Rabinowitz, J.D., and S. Enerback. 2020. Lactate: The ugly ¨
duckling of energy metabolism. Nat. Metab. 2:566–571. https://doi.org/
10.1038/s42255-020-0243-4
Raeis, V., P. Philip-Couderc, A. Roatti, W. Habre, J. Sierra, A. Kalangos, M.
Beghetti, and A.J. Baertschi. 2010. Central venous hypoxemia is a determinant of human atrial ATP-sensitive potassium channel expression: Evidence for a novel hypoxia-inducible factor 1alpha-Forkhead
box class O signaling pathway. Hypertension. 55:1186–1192. https://doi
.org/10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.109.148767
Raichle, M.E., and M.A. Mintun. 2006. Brain work and brain imaging. Annu.
Rev. Neurosci. 29:449–476. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.neuro.29
.051605.112819
Rasmussen, R., E. Nicholas, N.C. Petersen, A.G. Dietz, Q. Xu, Q. Sun, and M.
Nedergaard. 2019. Cortex-wide changes in extracellular potassium ions
parallel brain state transitions in awake behaving mice. Cell Rep. 28:
1182–1194.e4. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2019.06.082
Ratelade, J., N.R. Klug, D. Lombardi, M.K.S.C. Angelim, F. Dabertrand, V.
Domenga-Denier, R. Al-Shahi Salman, C. Smith, J.-F. Gerbeau, M.T.
Nelson, and A. Joutel. 2020. Reducing hypermuscularization of the
transitional segment between arterioles and capillaries protects against
spontaneous intracerebral hemorrhage. Circulation. 141:2078–2094.
https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.119.040963
Ray, R., C.E. Murdoch, M. Wang, C.X. Santos, M. Zhang, S. Alom-Ruiz, N.
Anilkumar, A. Ouattara, A.C. Cave, S.J. Walker, et al. 2011. Endothelial
Nox4 NADPH oxidase enhances vasodilatation and reduces blood
pressure in vivo. Arterioscler. Thromb. Vasc. Biol. 31:1368–1376. https://
doi.org/10.1161/ATVBAHA.110.219238
Reimann, F., F.M. Gribble, and F.M. Ashcroft. 2000. Differential response of
K(ATP) channels containing SUR2A or SUR2B subunits to nucleotides
and pinacidil. Mol. Pharmacol. 58:1318–1325. https://doi.org/10.1124/mol
.58.6.1318
Rhodin, J.A. 1967. The ultrastructure of mammalian arterioles and precapillary sphincters. J. Ultrastruct. Res. 18:181–223. https://doi.org/10.1016/
S0022-5320(67)80239-9
Rich, P.R. 2003. The molecular machinery of Keilin’s respiratory chain. Biochem. Soc. Trans. 31:1095–1105. https://doi.org/10.1042/bst0311095
Richardson, R.S., E.A. Noyszewski, K.F. Kendrick, J.S. Leigh, and P.D. Wagner. 1995. Myoglobin O2 desaturation during exercise. Evidence of
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 29 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
limited O2 transport. J. Clin. Invest. 96:1916–1926. https://doi.org/10
.1172/JCI118237
Ritterhoff, J., and R. Tian. 2017. Metabolism in cardiomyopathy: Every substrate matters. Cardiovasc. Res. 113:411–421. https://doi.org/10.1093/cvr/
cvx017
Rodriguez-Baeza, A., F. Reina-De La Torre, M. Ortega-Sanchez, and J. Sahuquillo-Barris. 1998. Perivascular structures in corrosion casts of the
human central nervous system: A confocal laser and scanning electron
microscope study. Anat. Rec. 252:176–184. https://doi.org/10.1002/(SICI)
1097-0185(199810)252:2<176::AID-AR3>3.0.CO;2-1
Rosano, G.M., and C. Vitale. 2018. Metabolic modulation of cardiac metabolism in heart failure. Card. Fail. Rev. 4:99–103. https://doi.org/10.15420/
cfr.2018.18.2
Rosehart, A.C., T.A. Longden, N. Weir, J.T. Fontaine, A. Joutel, and F. Dabertrand. 2021. Prostaglandin E2 dilates intracerebral arterioles when
applied to capillaries: Implications for small vessel diseases. Front. Aging
Neurosci. 13:695965. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnagi.2021.695965
Roth, K., and M.W. Weiner. 1991. Determination of cytosolic ADP and AMP
concentrations and the free energy of ATP hydrolysis in human muscle
and brain tissues with 31P NMR spectroscopy. Magn. Reson. Med. 22:
505–511. https://doi.org/10.1002/mrm.1910220258
Rouach, N., A. Koulakoff, V. Abudara, K. Willecke, and C. Giaume. 2008.
Astroglial metabolic networks sustain hippocampal synaptic transmission. Science. 322:1551–1555. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1164022
Rui, L. 2014. Energy metabolism in the liver. Compr. Physiol. 4:177–197.
https://doi.org/10.1002/cphy.c130024
Sagare, A.P., R.D. Bell, Z. Zhao, Q. Ma, E.A. Winkler, A. Ramanathan, and B.V.
Zlokovic. 2013. Pericyte loss influences Alzheimer-like neurodegeneration in mice. Nat. Commun. 4:2932. https://doi.org/10.1038/
ncomms3932
Sakadzic, S., E. Roussakis, M.A. Yaseen, E.T. Mandeville, V.J. Srinivasan, K. ´
Arai, S. Ruvinskaya, A. Devor, E.H. Lo, S.A. Vinogradov, and D.A. Boas.
2010. Two-photon high-resolution measurement of partial pressure of
oxygen in cerebral vasculature and tissue. Nat. Methods. 7:755–759.
https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.1490
Sancho, M., N.R. Klug, A. Mughal, M. Koide, S.H.l. Cruz, T.J. Heppner, A.D.
Bonev, D. Hill-Eubanks, and M.T. Nelson. 2022. Adenosine signaling
activates ATP-sensitive K+ channels in endothelial cells and pericytes in CNS capillaries. Sci. Signal. 15:eabl5405. https://doi.org/10
.1126/scisignal.abl5405
Satoh, E., M. Yamada, C. Kondo, V.P. Repunte, Y. Horio, T. Iijima, and Y.
Kurachi. 1998. Intracellular nucleotide-mediated gating of SUR/Kir6.0
complex potassium channels expressed in a mammalian cell line and its
modification by pinacidil. J. Physiol. 511:663–674. https://doi.org/10.1111/
j.1469-7793.1998.663bg.x
Schultz, S.G. 1997. Pump-leak parallelism in sodium-absorbing epithelia: The
role of ATP-regulated potassium channels. J. Exp. Zool. 279:476–483.
https://doi.org/10.1002/(SICI)1097-010X(19971201)279:5<476::AID
-JEZ10>3.0.CO;2-6
Segal, S.S., and B.R. Duling. 1989. Conduction of vasomotor responses in arterioles: A role for cell-to-cell coupling? Am. J. Physiol. 256:H838–H845.
https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpheart.1989.256.3.H838
Segal, S.S., D.N. Damon, and B.R. Duling. 1989. Propagation of vasomotor
responses coordinates arteriolar resistances. Am. J. Physiol. 256:
H832–H837. https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpheart.1989.256.3.H832
Seino, S., and T. Miki. 2003. Physiological and pathophysiological roles of
ATP-sensitive K+ channels. Prog. Biophys. Mol. Biol. 81:133–176. https://
doi.org/10.1016/S0079-6107(02)00053-6
Sepp, M., N. Sokolova, S. Jugai, M. Mandel, P. Peterson, and M. Vendelin.
2014. Tight coupling of Na+/K+-ATPase with glycolysis demonstrated in
permeabilized rat cardiomyocytes. PLoS One. 9:e99413. https://doi.org/
10.1371/journal.pone.0099413
Shi, Y., Z. Wu, N. Cui, W. Shi, Y. Yang, X. Zhang, A. Rojas, B.T. Ha, and C.
Jiang. 2007. PKA phosphorylation of SUR2B subunit underscores vascular KATP channel activation by beta-adrenergic receptors. Am.
J. Physiol. Regul. Integr. Comp. Physiol. 293:R1205–R1214. https://doi.org/
10.1152/ajpregu.00337.2007
Shi, Y., X. Chen, Z. Wu, W. Shi, Y. Yang, N. Cui, C. Jiang, and R.W. Harrison.
2008. cAMP-dependent protein kinase phosphorylation produces interdomain movement in SUR2B leading to activation of the vascular
KATP channel. J. Biol. Chem. 283:7523–7530. https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc
.M709941200
Shyng, S., and C.G. Nichols. 1997. Octameric stoichiometry of the KATP
channel complex. J. Gen. Physiol. 110:655–664. https://doi.org/10.1085/
jgp.110.6.655
Shyng, S.L., and C.G. Nichols. 1998. Membrane phospholipid control of nucleotide sensitivity of KATP channels. Science. 282:1138–1141. https://doi
.org/10.1126/science.282.5391.1138
Simpson, I.A., D. Dwyer, D. Malide, K.H. Moley, A. Travis, and S.J. Vannucci.
2008. The facilitative glucose transporter GLUT3: 20 years of distinction. Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab. 295:E242–E253. https://doi.org/10
.1152/ajpendo.90388.2008
Sirotin, Y.B., E.M.C. Hillman, C. Bordier, and A. Das. 2009. Spatiotemporal
precision and hemodynamic mechanism of optical point spreads in alert
primates. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 106:18390–18395. https://doi.org/10
.1073/pnas.0905509106
Song, H.W., K.L. Foreman, B.D. Gastfriend, J.S. Kuo, S.P. Palecek, and E.V.
Shusta. 2020. Transcriptomic comparison of human and mouse brain
microvessels. Sci. Rep. 10:12358. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020
-69096-7
Sonkusare, S.K., A.D. Bonev, J. Ledoux, W. Liedtke, M.I. Kotlikoff, T.J.
Heppner, D.C. Hill-Eubanks, and M.T. Nelson. 2012. Elementary Ca2+
signals through endothelial TRPV4 channels regulate vascular function.
Science. 336:597–601. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1216283
Sonkusare, S.K., T. Dalsgaard, A.D. Bonev, D.C. Hill-Eubanks, M.I. Kotlikoff,
J.D. Scott, L.F. Santana, and M.T. Nelson. 2014. AKAP150-dependent
cooperative TRPV4 channel gating is central to endotheliumdependent vasodilation and is disrupted in hypertension. Sci. Signal.
7:ra66. https://doi.org/10.1126/scisignal.2005052
Sonkusare, S.K., T. Dalsgaard, A.D. Bonev, and M.T. Nelson. 2016. Inward
rectifier potassium (Kir2.1) channels as end-stage boosters of
endothelium-dependent vasodilators. J. Physiol. 594:3271–3285. https://
doi.org/10.1113/JP271652
Spruce, A.E., N.B. Standen, and P.R. Stanfield. 1985. Voltage-dependent ATPsensitive potassium channels of skeletal muscle membrane. Nature. 316:
736–738. https://doi.org/10.1038/316736a0
Stamler, J.S., and G. Meissner. 2001. Physiology of nitric oxide in skeletal
muscle. Physiol. Rev. 81:209–237. https://doi.org/10.1152/physrev.2001
.81.1.209
Standen, N.B., J.M. Quayle, N.W. Davies, J.E. Brayden, Y. Huang, and M.T.
Nelson. 1989. Hyperpolarizing vasodilators activate ATP-sensitive K+
channels in arterial smooth muscle. Science. 245:177–180. https://doi
.org/10.1126/science.2501869
Stockli, J., D.J. Fazakerley, and D.E. James. 2011. GLUT4 exocytosis. ¨ J. Cell Sci.
124:4147–4159. https://doi.org/10.1242/jcs.097063
Straub, S.V., H. Girouard, P.E. Doetsch, R.M. Hannah, M.K. Wilkerson, and
M.T. Nelson. 2009. Regulation of intracerebral arteriolar tone by K(v)
channels: Effects of glucose and PKC. Am. J. Physiol. Cell Physiol. 297:
C788–C796. https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpcell.00148.2009
Straub, A.C., A.W. Lohman, M. Billaud, S.R. Johnstone, S.T. Dwyer, M.Y. Lee,
P.S. Bortz, A.K. Best, L. Columbus, B. Gaston, and B.E. Isakson. 2012.
Endothelial cell expression of haemoglobin α regulates nitric oxide
signalling. Nature. 491:473–477. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature11626
Straub, A.C., A.C. Zeigler, and B.E. Isakson. 2014. The myoendothelial junction: Connections that deliver the message. Physiology. 29:242–249.
https://doi.org/10.1152/physiol.00042.2013
Sugiura, K., S. Mihara, N. Fu, and T. Hisabori. 2020. Real-time monitoring of
the in vivo redox state transition using the ratiometric redox state
sensor protein FROG/B. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 117:16019–16026.
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1918919117
Sullivan, M.N., A.L. Gonzales, P.W. Pires, A. Bruhl, M.D. Leo, W. Li, A. Oulidi,
F.A. Boop, Y. Feng, J.H. Jaggar, et al. 2015. Localized TRPA1 channel Ca2+
signals stimulated by reactive oxygen species promote cerebral artery
dilation. Sci. Signal. 8:ra2. https://doi.org/10.1126/scisignal.2005659
Sung, M.W., Z. Yang, C.M. Driggers, B.L. Patton, B. Mostofian, J.D. Russo, D.M.
Zuckerman, and S.-L. Shyng. 2021. Vascular KATP channel structural
dynamics reveal regulatory mechanism by Mg-nucleotides. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA. 118:e2109441118. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2109441118
Tabula Muris Consortium. 2020. A single-cell transcriptomic atlas characterizes ageing tissues in the mouse. Nature. 583:590–595. https://doi
.org/10.1038/s41586-020-2496-1
Taggart, M.J., and S. Wray. 1998. Hypoxia and smooth muscle function: Key
regulatory events during metabolic stress. J. Physiol. 509:315–325.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-7793.1998.315bn.x
Tajada, S., C.M. Moreno, S. O’Dwyer, S. Woods, D. Sato, M.F. Navedo, and L.F.
Santana. 2017. Distance constraints on activation of TRPV4 channels by
AKAP150-bound PKCα in arterial myocytes. J. Gen. Physiol. 149:639–659.
https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.201611709
Takeda, Y., M.A. Nystoriak, M. Nieves-Cintrón, L.F. Santana, and M.F. Navedo. 2011. Relationship between Ca2+ sparklets and sarcoplasmic
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 30 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
reticulum Ca2+ load and release in rat cerebral arterial smooth muscle.
Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol. 301:H2285–H2294. https://doi.org/10
.1152/ajpheart.00488.2011
Tammaro, P., and F. Ashcroft. 2007. The Kir6.2-F333I mutation differentially
modulates KATP channels composed of SUR1 or SUR2 subunits.
J. Physiol. 581:1259–1269. https://doi.org/10.1113/jphysiol.2007.130211
Tantama, M., J.R. Mart´ınez-François, R. Mongeon, and G. Yellen. 2013.
Imaging energy status in live cells with a fluorescent biosensor of the
intracellular ATP-to-ADP ratio. Nat. Commun. 4:2550. https://doi.org/10
.1038/ncomms3550
Tao, X., J.L. Avalos, J. Chen, and R. MacKinnon. 2009. Crystal structure of the
eukaryotic strong inward-rectifier K+ channel Kir2.2 at 3.1 A resolution.
Science. 326:1668–1674. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1180310
Thakore, P., M.G. Alvarado, S. Ali, A. Mughal, P.W. Pires, E. Yamasaki, H.A.T.
Pritchard, B.E. Isakson, C.H.T. Tran, and S. Earley. 2021. Brain endothelial cell TRPA1 channels initiate neurovascular coupling. Elife. 10:
e63040. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.63040
Thompson, J.K., M.R. Peterson, and R.D. Freeman. 2003. Single-neuron activity and tissue oxygenation in the cerebral cortex. Science. 299:
1070–1072. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1079220
Thompson, J.K., M.R. Peterson, and R.D. Freeman. 2004. High-resolution
neurometabolic coupling revealed by focal activation of visual neurons. Nat. Neurosci. 7:919–920. https://doi.org/10.1038/nn1308
Thorens, B., and M. Mueckler. 2010. Glucose transporters in the 21st century.
Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab. 298:E141–E145. https://doi.org/10.1152/
ajpendo.00712.2009
Tran, C.H.T., M.S. Taylor, F. Plane, S. Nagaraja, N.M. Tsoukias, V. Solodushko, E.J. Vigmond, T. Furstenhaupt, M. Brigdan, and D.G. Welsh.
2012. Endothelial Ca2+ wavelets and the induction of myoendothelial
feedback. Am. J. Physiol. Cell Physiol. 302:C1226–C1242. https://doi.org/
10.1152/ajpcell.00418.2011
Trapp, S., S. Haider, P. Jones, M.S. Sansom, and F.M. Ashcroft. 2003. Identification of residues contributing to the ATP binding site of Kir6.2.
EMBO J. 22:2903–2912. https://doi.org/10.1093/emboj/cdg282
Tsoukias, N.M., D. Goldman, A. Vadapalli, R.N. Pittman, and A.S. Popel. 2007.
A computational model of oxygen delivery by hemoglobin-based oxygen carriers in three-dimensional microvascular networks. J. Theor.
Biol. 248:657–674. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtbi.2007.06.012
Tykocki, N.R., E.M. Boerman, and W.F. Jackson. 2017. Smooth muscle ion
channels and regulation of vascular tone in resistance arteries and
arterioles. Compr. Physiol. 7:485–581. https://doi.org/10.1002/cphy
.c160011
Tzou, W.S., C.E. Korcarz, S.E. Aeschlimann, B.J. Morgan, J.B. Skatrud, and J.H.
Stein. 2007. Coronary flow velocity changes in response to hypercapnia: Assessment by transthoracic Doppler echocardiography. J. Am. Soc.
Echocardiogr. 20:421–426. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.echo.2006.10.002
Urbach, V., E. Van Kerkhove, D. Maguire, and B.J. Harvey. 1996. Cross-talk
between ATP-regulated K+ channels and Na+ transport via cellular
metabolism in frog skin principal cells. J. Physiol. 491:99–109. https://doi
.org/10.1113/jphysiol.1996.sp021199
Vanlandewijck, M., L. He, M.A. Mae, J. Andrae, K. Ando, F. Del Gaudio, K. ¨
Nahar, T. Lebouvier, B. Laviña, L. Gouveia, et al. 2018. A molecular atlas
of cell types and zonation in the brain vasculature. Nature. 554:475–480.
https://doi.org/10.1038/nature25739
Vanzetta, I., and A. Grinvald. 2001. Evidence and lack of evidence for the
initial dip in the anesthetized rat: Implications for human functional
brain imaging. Neuroimage. 13:959–967. https://doi.org/10.1006/nimg
.2001.0843
Voet, D., J.G. Voet, and C.W. Pratt. 2016. Fundamentals of Biochemistry Life at
the Molecular Level. Wiley, Hoboken, NJ.
Voleti, V., K.B. Patel, W. Li, C. Perez Campos, S. Bharadwaj, H. Yu, C. Ford,
M.J. Casper, R.W. Yan, W. Liang, et al. 2019. Real-time volumetric microscopy of in vivo dynamics and large-scale samples with SCAPE 2.0.
Nat. Methods. 16:1054–1062. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-019-0579-4
Wagner, P.D. 2012. Muscle intracellular oxygenation during exercise: Optimization for oxygen transport, metabolism, and adaptive change. Eur.
J. Appl. Physiol. 112:1–8. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00421-011-1955-7
Wall, M., and N. Dale. 2008. Activity-dependent release of adenosine: A
critical re-evaluation of mechanism. Curr. Neuropharmacol. 6:329–337.
https://doi.org/10.2174/157015908787386087
Wang, X., J. Wu, L. Li, F. Chen, R. Wang, and C. Jiang. 2003. Hypercapnic
acidosis activates KATP channels in vascular smooth muscles. Circ. Res.
92:1225–1232. https://doi.org/10.1161/01.RES.0000075601.95738.6D
Wang, Z., Z. Ying, A. Bosy-Westphal, J. Zhang, B. Schautz, W. Later, S.B.
Heymsfield, and M.J. Müller. 2010. Specific metabolic rates of major
organs and tissues across adulthood: Evaluation by mechanistic model
of resting energy expenditure. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 92:1369–1377. https://
doi.org/10.3945/ajcn.2010.29885
Wang, F., Y. Cao, L. Ma, H. Pei, W.D. Rausch, and H. Li. 2018. Dysfunction of
cerebrovascular endothelial cells: Prelude to vascular dementia. Front.
Aging Neurosci. 10:376. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnagi.2018.00376
Weidemann, A., and R.S. Johnson. 2008. Biology of HIF-1α. Cell Death Differ.
15:621–627. https://doi.org/10.1038/cdd.2008.12
Weiss, J.N., N. Venkatesh, and S.T. Lamp. 1992. ATP-sensitive K+ channels
and cellular K+ loss in hypoxic and ischaemic mammalian ventricle.
J. Physiol. 447:649–673. https://doi.org/10.1113/jphysiol.1992.sp019022
Welsh, D.G., and S.S. Segal. 1998. Endothelial and smooth muscle cell conduction in arterioles controlling blood flow. Am. J. Physiol. 274:
H178–H186. https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpheart.1998.274.1.H178
Wende, A.R., M.K. Brahma, G.R. McGinnis, and M.E. Young. 2017. Metabolic
origins of heart failure. JACC Basic Transl. Sci. 2:297–310. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jacbts.2016.11.009
West, G.A., D.C. Leppla, and J.M. Simard. 1992. Effects of external pH on ionic
currents in smooth muscle cells from the basilar artery of the Guinea
pig. Circ. Res. 71:201–209. https://doi.org/10.1161/01.RES.71.1.201
Wilson, C., C.D. Saunter, J.M. Girkin, and J.G. McCarron. 2015. Pressuredependent regulation of Ca2+ signalling in the vascular endothelium.
J. Physiol. 593:5231–5253. https://doi.org/10.1113/JP271157
Wolfle, S.E., D.J. Chaston, K. Goto, S.L. Sandow, F.R. Edwards, and C.E. Hill. ¨
2011. Non-linear relationship between hyperpolarisation and relaxation
enables long distance propagation of vasodilatation. J. Physiol. 589:
2607–2623. https://doi.org/10.1113/jphysiol.2010.202580
Wray, S., and T. Burdyga. 2010. Sarcoplasmic reticulum function in smooth
muscle. Physiol. Rev. 90:113–178. https://doi.org/10.1152/physrev.00018.2008
Wu, J.-X., D. Ding, M. Wang, Y. Kang, X. Zeng, and L. Chen. 2018. Ligand
binding and conformational changes of SUR1 subunit in pancreatic
ATP-sensitive potassium channels. Protein Cell. 9:553–567. https://doi
.org/10.1007/s13238-018-0530-y
Wu, Z., Y. Cui, H. Wang, H. Wu, Y. Wan, B. Li, L. Wang, S. Pan, W. Peng, A.
Dong, et al. 2023. Neuronal activity-induced, equilibrative nucleoside
transporter-dependent, somatodendritic adenosine release revealed by
a GRAB sensor. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 120:e2212387120. https://doi
.org/10.1073/pnas.2212387120
Xi, Q., A. Adebiyi, G. Zhao, K.E. Chapman, C.M. Waters, A. Hassid, and J.H.
Jaggar. 2008. IP3 constricts cerebral arteries via IP3 receptormediated TRPC3 channel activation and independently of sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca2+ release. Circ. Res. 102:1118–1126. https://doi
.org/10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.108.173948
Xia, J., and B.R. Duling. 1998. Patterns of excitation-contraction coupling in
arterioles: Dependence on time and concentration. Am. J. Physiol. 274:
H323–H330. https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpheart.1998.274.1.H323
Xie, L.-H., S.A. John, and J.N. Weiss. 2002. Spermine block of the strong inward
rectifier potassium channel Kir2.1: Dual roles of surface charge screening and
pore block. J. Gen. Physiol. 120:53–66. https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.20028576
Yamada, M., S. Isomoto, S. Matsumoto, C. Kondo, T. Shindo, Y. Horio, and Y.
Kurachi. 1997. Sulphonylurea receptor 2B and Kir6.1 form a
sulphonylurea-sensitive but ATP-insensitive K+ channel. J. Physiol. 499:
715–720. https://doi.org/10.1113/jphysiol.1997.sp021963
Yamamoto, Y., K. Imaeda, and H. Suzuki. 1999. Endothelium-dependent
hyperpolarization and intercellular electrical coupling in Guinea-pig
mesenteric arterioles. J. Physiol. 514:505–513. https://doi.org/10.1111/j
.1469-7793.1999.505ae.x
Yamamura, H., Y. Suzuki, H. Yamamura, K. Asai, W. Giles, and Y. Imaizumi.
2018. Hypoxic stress upregulates Kir2.1 expression by a pathway including hypoxic-inducible factor-1α and dynamin2 in brain capillary
endothelial cells. Am. J. Physiol. Cell Physiol. 315:C202–C213. https://doi
.org/10.1152/ajpcell.00154.2017
Yamanishi, S., K. Katsumura, T. Kobayashi, and D.G. Puro. 2006. Extracellular lactate as a dynamic vasoactive signal in the rat retinal microvasculature. Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol. 290:H925–H934. https://
doi.org/10.1152/ajpheart.01012.2005
Yang, H.-Q., E. Subbotina, R. Ramasamy, and W.A. Coetzee. 2016. Cardiovascular KATP channels and advanced aging. Pathobiol. Aging Age Relat.
Dis. 6:32517. https://doi.org/10.3402/pba.v6.32517
Yang, H.-Q., W. Martinez-Ortiz, J. Hwang, X. Fan, T.J. Cardozo, and W.A.
Coetzee. 2020. Palmitoylation of the KATP channel Kir6.2 subunit promotes channel opening by regulating PIP2 sensitivity. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. USA. 117:10593–10602. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1918088117
Yang, A.C., R.T. Vest, F. Kern, D.P. Lee, M. Agam, C.A. Maat, P.M. Losada,
M.B. Chen, N. Schaum, N. Khoury, et al. 2022. A human brain vascular
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 31 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
atlas reveals diverse mediators of Alzheimer’s risk. Nature. 603:
885–892. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-021-04369-3
Yaniv, Y., M. Juhaszova, H.B. Nuss, S. Wang, D.B. Zorov, E.G. Lakatta, and S.J.
Sollott. 2010. Matching ATP supply and demand in mammalian heart:
In vivo, in vitro, and in silico perspectives. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 1188:
133–142. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1749-6632.2009.05093.x
Young, J. 1929. Malpighi’s “De Pulmonibus”. Proc. R. Soc. Med. 23:1–11. https://
doi.org/10.1177/003591572902300101
Yuan, H.-X., Y. Xiong, and K.-L. Guan. 2013. Nutrient sensing, metabolism,
and cell growth control. Mol. Cell. 49:379–387. https://doi.org/10.1016/j
.molcel.2013.01.019
Zambach, S.A., C. Cai, H.C.C. Helms, B.O. Hald, Y. Dong, J.C. Fordsmann, R.M.
Nielsen, J. Hu, M. Lønstrup, B. Brodin, and M.J. Lauritzen. 2021.
Precapillary sphincters and pericytes at first-order capillaries as key
regulators for brain capillary perfusion. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 118:
e2023749118. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2023749118
Zhao, C., and R. MacKinnon. 2021. Molecular structure of an open human
KATP channel. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 118:e2112267118. https://doi.org/
10.1073/pnas.2112267118
Zhao, G., H.C. Joca, M.T. Nelson, and W.J. Lederer. 2020a. ATP- and voltagedependent electro-metabolic signaling regulates blood flow in heart.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 117:7461–7470. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas
.1922095117
Zhao, G., H.C. Joca, and W.J. Lederer. 2020b. Dynamic measurement and
imaging of capillaries, arterioles, and pericytes in mouse heart. J. Vis.
Exp. https://doi.org/10.3791/61566
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 32 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024



HYPOTHESIS
Electro-metabolic signaling
Thomas A. Longden1,2 and W. Jonathan Lederer1,3
Precise matching of energy substrate delivery to local metabolic needs is essential for the health and function of all tissues.
Here, we outline a mechanistic framework for understanding this critical process, which we refer to as electro-metabolic
signaling (EMS). All tissues exhibit changes in metabolism over varying spatiotemporal scales and have widely varying
energetic needs and reserves. We propose that across tissues, common signatures of elevated metabolism or increases in
energy substrate usage that exceed key local thresholds rapidly engage mechanisms that generate hyperpolarizing electrical
signals in capillaries that then relax contractile elements throughout the vasculature to quickly adjust blood flow to meet
changing needs. The attendant increase in energy substrate delivery serves to meet local metabolic requirements and thus
avoids a mismatch in supply and demand and prevents metabolic stress. We discuss in detail key examples of EMS that our
laboratories have discovered in the brain and the heart, and we outline potential further EMS mechanisms operating in
tissues such as skeletal muscle, pancreas, and kidney. We suggest that the energy imbalance evoked by EMS uncoupling may
be central to cellular dysfunction from which the hallmarks of aging and metabolic diseases emerge and may lead to
generalized organ failure states—such as diverse flavors of heart failure and dementia. Understanding and manipulating EMS
may be key to preventing or reversing these dysfunctions.
Introduction
From the exquisitely elegant, computationally intense functions
of the brain to the error-free pumping of the heart across activity levels, there is a constant requirement that energy is
supplied to tissues and waste products are removed in an efficient manner. At the cellular level, the maintenance of ionic
gradients across the plasma membrane, protein synthesis and
transport, the processes of cell division, growth, and repair
(Buttgereit and Brand, 1995), and the diverse operations beyond
these are all inextricably tied to the ready availability of local
energy substrates. As these substrates are delivered via the
bloodstream, it makes all cells in all tissues critically dependent
on an optimized vascular function to direct blood to areas of
metabolic need at exactly the right moment. Understanding
exactly how this task is achieved throughout the body has engaged cardiovascular biologists since the earliest descriptions of
the circulatory system (Young, 1929; Harvey, 1957). Now with
the advent of modern molecular, electrophysiological, and imaging techniques, substantial progress has been made in determining the structure and function of the vascular system at high
resolution (Blinder et al., 2013; Tykocki et al., 2017; Vanlandewijck
et al., 2018; Hariharan et al., 2020; Kirst et al., 2020; Jackson,
2022; Meng et al., 2022). Together, these data enable precision
measurements of blood flow control spanning the molecular
to the systems levels. However, we still have an incomplete
understanding of how blood flow through tissues with highly
varied energetic demands is mapped to metabolic needs at the
organ, local network, and individual cell levels.
The EMS hypothesis
A diverse set of electro-metabolic signaling (EMS) mechanisms
operate throughout organ systems to precisely match local
energy demand with supply via capillary electrical signaling
to tightly control blood flow.
In this article, we set out the concept of EMS as a framework
to garner a new understanding of local blood flow control
mechanisms, which we have been developing over a number of
years (Lederer et al., 1996; Longden et al., 2017; Zhao et al.,
2020a). We hypothesize that this provides the core mechanistic link that enables the matching of energy demand to the delivery of increased blood flow across all organ systems (Fig. 1).
Here, we outline the theoretical basis of this unifying EMS hypothesis and underscore the technical developments that are
needed to accelerate progress in studying this phenomenon. The
core predictions made by the EMS hypothesis are:
............................................................................................................................................................................. 1
Department of Physiology, University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA; 2
Laboratory of Neurovascular Interactions, Center for Biomedical Engineering
and Technology, University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA; 3
Laboratory of Molecular Cardiology, Center for Biomedical Engineering and Technology,
University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.
Correspondence to Thomas A. Longden: thomas.longden@som.umaryland.edu; W. Jonathan Lederer: jlederer@som.umaryland.edu.
© 2024 Longden and Lederer. This article is distributed under the terms of an Attribution–Noncommercial–Share Alike–No Mirror Sites license for the first six months
after the publication date (see http://www.rupress.org/terms/). After six months it is available under a Creative Commons License (Attribution–Noncommercial–Share Alike
4.0 International license, as described at https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/).
Rockefeller University Press https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451 1 of 32
J. Gen. Physiol. 2024 Vol. 156 No. 2 e202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
• Energy-intensive processes in all organ systems should couple
to local hyperemia, as has been established for brain, heart,
and skeletal muscle among others.
• The signaling mechanisms that couple energy usage to
blood flow should satisfy the hallmarks of EMS, which we
outline below.
• EMS mechanisms operating in different organ systems should
share the same basis (Fig. 1) but may be tailored to suit the
particular spatiotemporal energy needs of the local tissue.
• Uncoupling of EMS should disrupt the matching of energy
supply to local demand and thereby may precipitate a range of
tissue dysfunction.
We explore these predictions in detail and outline key outstanding questions that need to be addressed to subject this
hypothesis to rigorous attempts at falsification.
Energy substrate supply and metabolism
The nanobattery adenosine triphosphate (ATP) stores energy
within its hydrolyzable phosphate–phosphate bonds that can be
tapped through serial chemical reactions to release energy to
power work throughout the cell. These reactions yield adenosine
diphosphate (ADP) and subsequently adenosine monophosphate
(AMP), which can then be further processed into adenosine.
Most often, however, ADP is rapidly phosphorylated back to ATP
to recharge the battery. Thus, cellular processes are primarily
fueled by the free energy liberated from the transfer of phosphoryl groups from ATP to acceptor molecules. The breaking of
the phosphoanhydride bonds between these groups (yielding
ADP and inorganic phosphate—Pi—if from ATP) enables the
work that undergirds the full gamut of complex cellular behaviors, ranging from motility and contraction to ion transport,
secretion, and the diverse reactions in cellular signaling. All
these processes are thus reliant on a range of metabolic enzymes
and mitochondrial functions, and the preferred carbon source
utilized for metabolism on a moment-to-moment basis differs
between tissues. In the brain, glucose is most heavily used
(Mergenthaler et al., 2013) while the heart often prioritizes lipid
sources (Goldberg et al., 2012).
Diverse energy buffers are also available, including glycogen
stored in the liver which can be mobilized to generate more
glucose on an as-needed basis. Circulating glucose is taken up
into cells via facilitated diffusion enabled by glucose transporters (GLUTs) and then catabolized through the subsequent
reactions of glycolysis, the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle
(Arnold and Finley, 2023), and oxidative phosphorylation
(Bonora et al., 2012; Fig. 2). The complete oxidation of a single
glucose molecule through these processes is estimated to yield
the formation of around 30 ATP molecules, although this
number varies between sources and may be modified as further
information becomes available (Rich, 2003).
Initially, glycolysis yields two ATP molecules during the
hydrolysis of a glucose molecule to two pyruvates. The latter can
then enter the TCA cycle in the mitochondria after conversion to
the high-energy intermediate acetyl coenzyme A (acetyl-CoA) to
produce the coenzymes nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide
(NADH) and flavin adenine dinucleotide (FADH2), which in turn
act as electron donors for the electron transport chain (ETC) in
Figure 1. An overview of EMS. EMS consists of three key stages (top) for which example inputs and outputs are given for an idealized tissue. This basic
framework can be applied to study EMS in different organ systems, but the molecules underlying initiation and transduction may vary. EMS is first initiated by
metabolic activity which causes a decrease in the availability of extracellular substrates and/or changes in intracellular energy status and an increase in
metabolic byproducts. In the second stage of EMS, this metabolic disturbance is sensed by the local vasculature and rapidly transduced into endothelial cell
membrane hyperpolarization via an increase in K+ channel activity, which will ultimately promote vasodilation and an increase in blood flow. Hyperpolarizing
signals are initiated in capillaries at the nexus of metabolic activity where capillary pericytes and endothelial cells play key roles in this process and are
transmitted either by passive electrotonic spread or by regenerative Kir2.1-mediated signaling upstream to areas of the vasculature covered in contractile cells
(i.e., contractile pericytes or smooth muscle cells). These contractile cells are induced to relax to produce an increase in blood flow, and this final output of EMS
delivers more substrates to the active region and has the effect of reversing the deviations from set-point of the initiating metabolic factors and homeostatically resets local metabolic reserves.
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 2 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
the inner mitochondrial membrane, wherein the flow of electrons through the protein complexes comprising the ETC culminate in the coupling of the electrochemical proton (H+)
gradient to oxidative phosphorylation, generating ATP via the
activity of ATP synthase (Fig. 2). In a system replete with energy
substrates, each mitochondrial ATP synthase produces in excess
of 100 ATP per second through this process, which can be increased to >400 ATP per second under catalytically optimal
conditions (Matsuno-Yagi and Hatefi, 1988). In intact cells, these
processes ultimately maintain a cytoplasmic ATP concentration
in the millimolar range (Greiner and Glonek, 2021), which is
typically several orders of magnitude higher than that of ADP
(free [ADP] in heart tissue has been estimated at 15 µM [Weiss
et al., 1992], in the brain at 12 µM [Roth and Weiner, 1991; Tabula
Muris Consortium, 2020], and in resting skeletal muscle at 6 µM
[Roth and Weiner, 1991]) and orders of magnitude higher still
than that of AMP (estimated at 71 nM in brain and 5 nM in
muscle [Roth and Weiner, 1991], and 250 nM in heart [Airan
et al., 2009]). The TCA cycle is the linkage point for the oxidation of all energy substrates, including fatty acids, lactate, ketone
bodies, and amino acids, which are through various mechanisms
processed to acetyl-CoA, which is then used to produce ATP
through the mechanisms described above (Arnold and Finley,
2023).
Ultimately the substrates and the oxygen (O2) required to
power the ETC are delivered in the blood via the plasma and its
O2-laden red blood cells (RBCs), respectively, which are directed
through the incredibly elaborate vascular networks of all tissues
(Box 1). To avoid deficits in energy supply, substrate delivery via
the blood needs to be matched precisely to the activity levels of
Figure 2. Metabolic cues for EMS. The basic metabolic processes occurring in all cells provide a rich tapestry of potential cues for EMS. Here, the oxidation of
glucose is depicted, showing several potential EMS cues in green. Initially, a substrate is transported into the cell cytoplasm for use. In this example, glucose is
brought in via GLUT transporters and then processed via the 10 reactions of glycolysis to yield two pyruvate molecules and two ATP, along with two NADH.
From here, pyruvate can be fermented to lactate, which can be released from cells via monocarboxylate (MCT) transporters. Alternatively, pyruvate can be
used to produce acetyl-CoA (also producing NADH and CO2 as a byproduct) that can enter the TCA cycle in the mitochondrial matrix. The TCA cycle reduces a
number of NAD+ molecules to NADH and FAD+ to FADH2, while also generating more CO2. The NADH and FADH2 in turn act as electron donors to the ETC in
the inner mitochondrial membrane to generate a proton gradient that ATP synthase (i.e., Complex V) uses to yield large amounts of ATP, which can then be
exported via the adenine nucleotide translocator in exchange for ADP. In addition to the generated CO2, lactate, or glucose levels themselves acting as cues, the
redox state of the cell or the ATP:ADP ratio may also signal to open K+ channels such as KATP to generate membrane hyperpolarization. Either ATP:ADP ratio in
the bulk cytosol or in submembrane regions around response elements could conceivably contribute to this process. The generation of these cues may occur
directly in the working cells of a given tissue such as cardiac myocytes in the heart, or in metabolic sentinel cells such as in pericytes in the brain.
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 3 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
organs and muscle at the most macroscopic levels, all the way
down to that of individual cells, while also being rapidly and
continually modulated to meet fluctuating local energetic needs.
Extensive work has uncovered the molecular mechanisms
through which the contractile state of smooth muscle cells
(SMCs) in arteries and arterioles is regulated to control perfusion (Segal et al., 1989; Segal and Duling, 1989; McCarron and
Halpern, 1990; Brayden and Nelson, 1992; Daut et al., 1994; Knot
and Nelson, 1995, 1998; Little et al., 1995a, 1995b; Nelson et al.,
1995; Bonev and Nelson, 1996; Dora et al., 1997, 2003; Haas and
Duling, 1997; Beach et al., 1998; Edwards et al., 1998; Porter et al.,
1998; Welsh and Segal, 1998; Jaggar et al., 2000; Jaggar, 2001;
Heppner et al., 2002; Ledoux et al., 2008; Xi et al., 2008;
Figueroa and Duling, 2009; Hannah et al., 2011; Mufti et al.,
2010; Takeda et al., 2011; Bagher et al., 2012; Dabertrand et al.,
2012, 2013; Sonkusare et al., 2012, 2014, 2016; Straub et al., 2012,
2014; Tran et al., 2012; Abd El-Rahman et al., 2013; Gonzales
et al., 2014; Harraz et al., 2014; Mercado et al., 2014; Earley
and Brayden, 2015; Sullivan et al., 2015; Wilson et al., 2015;
Garland et al., 2017; McCarron et al., 2017; Tajada et al., 2017; Lee
et al., 2018; Hald and Welsh, 2020; Ottolini et al., 2020;
Mironova et al., 2023), which is governed by control of the
membrane potential and intracellular Ca2+ levels. More recent
work is now revealing the role of the endothelial cells (ECs) of
capillaries and their closely associated pericytes calling for blood
flow increases and in the fine-tuning of the incoming flow of
blood (Beach et al., 1998; McGahren et al., 1998; Hall et al., 2014;
Longden et al., 2017, 2021; Harraz et al., 2018a, 2022; Lamb et al.,
2018; Gonzales et al., 2020; Moshkforoush et al., 2020; Zhao
et al., 2020a; Hartmann et al., 2021; Rosehart et al., 2021;
Thakore et al., 2021; Zambach et al., 2021; Hariharan et al., 2022;
Klug et al., 2023).
The milieu and signaling environments of the various organ
systems differ vastly throughout an organism, and thus the
question arises of how the continuous body-wide arterio–
capillary–venous network correctly integrates the thousands of
data streams arising from the diverse activities of local cells with
its relatively limited toolkit of protein sensors and actuators.
Here, we propose that the solutions to this problem lie in a set of
sophisticated yet generalized signaling mechanisms that ultimately convert increases in local energy demand into electrical
signaling throughout the vasculature and take center stage in
matching blood flow to metabolic needs in all tissues—a process
we refer to as electro-metabolic signaling or EMS (Fig. 1). We
outline this concept in detail and provide examples which we have
elucidated in the brain and the heart, along with key experimental
hallmarks that can be used to implicate this process in other tissues. We explore possibilities for the breakdown of EMS, which
may play an important role in a wide range of disease contexts
that involve mismatches between energy supply and demand, and
we detail the essential questions that need to be addressed to build
a complete view of the mechanistic landscape of EMS.
KATP channels are the key EMS transducers linking the cellular
metabolic state to an electrical signal
Central to EMS is the conversion of metabolic information
into electrical information that can be propagated through the
“wires” of the vasculature, and ATP-sensitive potassium (K+;
KATP) channels are uniquely suited to perform this task. Accordingly, we review below the key biophysical features of these
transducers, with a central focus on the vascular isoform of this
channel which makes an important contribution to EMS in the
brain, before discussing mechanisms through which KATP
channels may be engaged in response to changing the metabolic
state of the tissue.
KATP channels lie at the center of the EMS signaling network
and serve as the primary transducer that ties the internal cellular metabolic state to the membrane potential. These channels
thus can convert changes in the local metabolic environment
into electrical messages that can be transmitted over long distances (typically with the aid of Kir2.1 channels, as detailed
below) to the contractile cells of the vasculature (i.e., SMCs, and
the contractile pericytes of the proximal regions of the capillary
bed; Box 1).
The pore-forming subunits of KATP channels are members of
the Kir channel family (Inagaki et al., 1995; Hibino et al., 2010).
Currents through this family of channels depend on the driving
force for K+ (i.e., membrane potential [Em] minus EK). Accordingly, when Em is experimentally held at voltages negative to EK
(which does not occur under physiological conditions), Kir
channels conduct large, ohmic inward currents, but when Em is
positive to EK (as in healthy physiological conditions), outward
currents with varying degrees of inward rectification are
observed according to the channel subtype, causing the current–
voltage relationship to deviate from ohmic linearity. Rectification ranges from strong, in which only a small amount of current
flows from the interior of the cell to the exterior at potentials
positive to EK—as is the case for Kir2.1 channels which feature
prominently in electrical conduction, described below—to weak,
where rectification begins only at very positive potentials, tens
of millivolts from EK, as is the case for KATP channels (Hibino
et al., 2010).
The weakly rectifying current–voltage profile of KATP channels results mainly from intracellular Mg2+ block at positive
potentials (more positive than approximately −20 mV [Horie
et al., 1987]). The key property of these channels is that they
operate as exquisite molecular transducers coupling complex
changes in intracellular energy state to membrane electrical
activity. This stems from the unique sensitivity of KATP channels
to the ratio of intracellular ATP to ADP, being initially named for
the fact that when ATP levels increase, their K+ conductance is
inhibited (Noma, 1983). The basic structure of a functional KATP
channel is a hetero–octameric complex composed of four Kir6.x
subunits (either Kir6.1 or Kir6.2, encoded by KCNJ8 and KCNJ11,
respectively) and four sulphonyl urea receptor (SUR) subunits
(SUR1 or SUR2, encoded by ABCC8 or ABCC9, respectively;
Clement et al., 1997; Inagaki et al., 1997; Shyng and Nichols,
1997). Different Kir6.x/SURx subunit combinations create KATP
channels with differing nucleotide sensitivities and biophysical
characteristics. The resultant diversity of KATP channels are
widely expressed in cardiac myocytes (Noma, 1983), pancreatic
β-cells (Cook and Hales, 1984), skeletal muscle (Spruce et al., 1985),
neurons (Liss and Roeper, 2001; Ballanyi, 2004; Mart´ınez-François
et al., 2018), as well as vascular smooth muscle (Standen et al., 1989;
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 4 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
Beech et al., 1993; Sancho et al., 2022), endothelial cells (ECs; Aziz
et al., 2017; Sancho et al., 2022), and pericytes (He et al., 2018;
Vanlandewijck et al., 2018; Hariharan et al., 2020, 2022; Sancho
et al., 2022).
Box 1. Vascular organization and cell types
The vasculature is broadly segmented into arteries/arterioles, capillaries, and venules/veins, which coordinate distinct aspects of blood delivery. Arteries and
arterioles are composed of an inner lining of endothelial cells (ECs) that directly interface with the blood to convert luminal signals into a form that can be integrated by the overlying smooth muscle cells (SMCs; Fig. B1). The latter are the key contractile cells that, through actin–myosin crossbridge cycling, determine the
diameter of the lumen and thus the flow of blood flow into the capillaries. Control of SMC membrane potential and intracellular Ca2+ are central to this process.
Figure B1. Vascular organization and cell types. (A) Scanning electron micrograph (SEM) of a bifurcating arteriole covered in contractile smooth muscle
cells (SMCs; individual cells denoted in orange). Scale bar: 50 µm. (B) SEM of a contractile pericyte and its processes (pink) enwrapping a capillary. Note the
clear distinction from SMC morphology. Scale bar: 11.5 µm. A and B adapted with permission from Rodriguez-Baeza et al. (1998). (C) SEM of brain capillaries
showing the sequential branch ordering of vessels up to the fifth order (green). Note this system is not perfect, as some anastomosing vessels could be labeled
as two distinct orders (*). Scale bar: 50 µm. Adapted with permission from Krucker et al. (2006). (D) SEM of the choroid vasculature showing lobular vascular
architecture which makes it impossible to accurately assign branch orders (e.g., green vessels). 65× magnification. Adapted with permission from Miodonski ´
and Jasinski (1979) ´ .
In a number of vascular beds, capillaries are typically referred to by “branch order” in which the final SMC-covered arteriole is taken as the zero-order vessel,
and the initial capillary emanating from this is the first-order capillary. From here, branch numbering increases sequentially each time the capillaries branch,
regardless of vessel orientation or diameter. However, this classification system is difficult to apply in vascular beds in which the capillaries are highly anastomosing, such as heart, where this hierarchical ordering quickly breaks down by dint of the many reciprocal connections between adjacent capillaries (Longden
et al., 2023; Fig. B1). The capillaries are composed of exceptionally thin (∼100 nm) ECs that wrap around themselves once to form a lumen just wide enough to
allow RBCs to squeeze through in single file, experiencing significant mechanical forces as they go, and are covered by the cell bodies and processes of a range of
pericytes.
Using the brain as an example, at least three pericyte subtypes have been distinguished based on their locations in the capillary bed, their relative expression
of α-smooth muscle actin (α-SMA), and the appearance of their processes, designated ensheathing (or contractile) pericytes, mesh pericytes, and thin-strand
pericytes (Grant et al., 2019; Gonzales et al., 2020; Hariharan et al., 2020; Ratelade et al., 2020). Contractile pericytes (Fig. B1) cover the majority of the
parenchyma-facing surface of the first to approximately the fourth-order capillary ECs found immediately downstream of SMC-enwrapped penetrating arterioles
and heavily express α-SMA but have a distinct morphology to SMCs. Mesh pericytes are found immediately adjacent to the last contractile pericytes of a given
capillary offshoot and exhibit intermediate levels of vessel coverage and are α-SMA-negative. Finally, thin-strand pericyte (Hariharan et al., 2020) coverage begins
at approximately fifth-order branches and continues until the capillaries merge with the venular system (Grant et al., 2019). Each thin-strand pericyte has a unique
domain of extensive, exquisitely fine processes that stretch along the capillary surface for up to ∼300 µm (Berthiaume et al., 2018). Compared with contractile
pericytes, thin-strand pericytes express very low levels of α-SMA (Alarcon-Martinez et al., 2018; Vanlandewijck et al., 2018), suggesting that their contributions to
blood flow control mechanistically, in contrast with the rapid and dynamic regulation of the diameter of the underlying capillary orchestrated by their upstream
contractile counterparts (Hill et al., 2015; Gonzales et al., 2020; Zambach et al., 2021). Indeed, recently, the contractile abilities of thin-strand pericytes were
explored using optogenetic actuators and were revealed to be comparatively slower and smaller in magnitude, yet still capable of exerting a significant influence on
blood flow (Hartmann et al., 2021). Detailed studies of pericyte morphology and organization in other tissues are currently awaiting investigators’ attention.
RBCs transit the capillary bed, releasing their oxygen to the tissue as they go and are accompanied by nutrient-rich plasma from which energy substrates are
extracted and these are drained back toward the heart for recirculation initially in small venules and then in larger veins. The veins consist of the same components
as the arterioles, but here the smooth muscle is disorganized and non-contractile (Hill et al., 2015), and as such, these vessels do not substantially change their
diameter. In most tissues, luminal valves prevent the backflow of blood and pooling but these are absent from the brain where gravity assists drainage.
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 5 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
The most well-studied KATP isotype in pancreatic β-cells is
formed by Kir6.2 and SUR1 subunits (Noma, 1983; Inagaki et al.,
1995). In contrast, the “vascular” form of the KATP channel found
in SMCs, ECs, and pericytes is formed from Kir6.1 and SUR2
(Nelson and Quayle, 1995; Seino and Miki, 2003; He et al., 2018;
Vanlandewijck et al., 2018). SUR2 undergoes a range of alternative splicing events (Chutkow et al., 1999), which modulate
the nucleotide-binding properties and pharmacology of the
channel in its final form (Reimann et al., 2000). The variant
known as SUR2B, resulting from the excision of the final 129
coding base pairs plus 48 from the 39 untranslated region, is
thought to be the predominant isoform found in the vasculature
(Chutkow et al., 1999). In the heart, a combination of Kir6.2/
SUR2A gives rise to KATP channels that have distinct properties
from those in the vasculature and other locations. A number of
recent studies have solved the structures of several KATP channel
types at high-resolution by leveraging advances in single particle
cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM; Cheng, 2015; Cheng et al.,
2015), including a hamster SUR1–mouse/rat Kir6.2 hybrid complex and a human SUR1–Kir6.2 complex in both closed and open
states (Lee et al., 2017; Li et al., 2017; Martin et al., 2017; Zhao and
Mackinnon, 2021). Recently, Sung et al. (2021) provided the first
cryo-EM structures for the vascular Kir6.1/SUR2B KATP channel
in the presence of ATP and bound by the inhibitory compound
glibenclamide. This study determined that the architecture of the
vascular isoform of the channel exhibits key structural and
conformational features that are not observed in pancreatic KATP
channels prepared under similar conditions (Martin et al., 2017;
Wu et al., 2018), such as a displaced cytoplasmic domain as detailed below, which may confer distinct properties at the functional level that influence how these different channel subtypes
contribute to EMS.
Both Kir6.1 and Kir6.2 subunits are composed of two transmembrane helices bridged by an extracellular loop, which in
tetrameric assemblies generates the narrow portion of the pore
that comprises the highly conserved K+ selectivity filter, accompanied by cytoplasmic N- and C-terminal domains (Nichols,
2006). The hallmark feature of KATP channels is their regulation
of Em in response to changes in intracellular nucleotide concentrations (Table 1), which bind at several locations throughout
the channel complex. Micromolar ATP inhibits KATP channels
through a direct interaction with the Kir6.x subunit. Residues
R50 and K185 are essential for this ATP inhibition in Kir6.2, and
these positive charges are conserved at equivalent positions in
Kir6.1, but absent in most other ATP-insensitive Kir family
members (Trapp et al., 2003).
Because cytosolic intracellular ATP concentration is relatively high under physiological conditions, typically in the range
of 1–2 mM in SMCs (Larcombe-McDouall et al., 1999; Gribble
et al., 2000) and 5–10 mM in cardiac myocytes (Greiner and
Glonek, 2021), this can exert a powerful suppressive influence
on basal channel activity and is counterbalanced by the influences of other interacting molecules and signaling modifications
outlined below (Huang et al., 2019). Kir6.2 variants typically
exhibit higher free ATP sensitivity than Kir6.1-containing
channels (Table 1), and the recent structure provided by Sung
and colleagues reveals subtle differences that may contribute to
this distinction. In Kir6.1-containing channels, the cytoplasmic
domain of the pore-forming subunit is oriented ∼5.8 A further ˚
away from the membrane and rotated counterclockwise relative
to its Kir6.2 counterpart, allowing for fewer close residue interactions with ATP than are seen in the Kir6.2 ATP binding site.
This <1 nm difference in cytoplasmic domain positioning is thus
a possible contributory factor to the lower ATP sensitivity of the
vascular KATP isoform (Yamada et al., 1997; Satoh et al., 1998).
The large accompanying SUR subunits are members of the
ATP-binding cassette (ABC) membrane protein family and have
17 TM regions (Fig. 3). These regions are grouped into three
transmembrane domains: TMD0 (comprising TM1–TM5), TMD1
(TM6–TM11), and TMD2 (TM12–TM17). TMD0 is bound to the
channel α subunit via a bridging cytosolic loop referred to as L0,
which plays a crucial role in channel gating and activity, likely
by transmitting signals to the pore-forming subunit through
conformational rearrangements (Babenko and Bryan, 2003;
Masia et al., 2007; McClenaghan et al., 2018). Each SUR subunit
contains two nucleotide-binding domains (NBDs): one between
TMD1 and TMD2 (termed NBD1) and another in the C-terminus
following TMD2 (termed NBD2; Hibino et al., 2010; Lee et al.,
2017; Li et al., 2017; Martin et al., 2017). These NBDs are key sites
for nucleotide regulation and allow the interactions of magnesium (Mg2+)-bound adenosine diphosphate (Mg-ADP) and
Mg-ATP (as well as other Mg-nucleotides) to produce a key
stimulatory effect on KATP channel activity through NBD dimerization resulting in channel opening. Here, Mg-ATP binding
to NBD1 in conjunction with Mg-ADP binding to NBD2 promotes
dimerization, which leads to channel opening through conformational changes mediated via a structural element connecting
NBD1 to TMD2 known as the N1–T2 linker. At its C-terminal end,
this linker contains 15 glutamate/aspartate residues, forming a
region known as the ED domain. Molecular dynamics analyses
suggest that when MgADP is absent, electrostatic interaction
between NBD2 and the Kir6.1 cytoplasmic domain acts as an
autoinhibitory motif, preventing NBD2 dimerization with NBD1
and avoiding unregulated activation—consistent with low
spontaneous activity observed for the vascular form of KATP
channels (Fujita and Kurachi, 2000). The binding of MgADP to
NBD2 alters the shape of the ED domain, a reorganization that
allows the rotation of NBD2 toward NBD1 and thus promotes
dimerization and the transmission of a conformational change
that opens the channel.
A striking difference between the cardiac and vascular forms
of the KATP channel lies in the contrasting sensitivities of
channel activity to the membrane phospholipid phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate (PIP2). In Kir6.2-containing KATP
channels (Hilgemann and Ball, 1996; Baukrowitz et al., 1998), the
presence of PIP2 decreases the affinity of the channel for ATP
>100-fold and dramatically increases channel open probability
in the absence of nucleotides (Shyng and Nichols, 1998). In
contrast, the Kir6.1 form of the channel possesses a higher affinity for PIP2, with PIP2 binding so tightly as to render channel
activity insensitive to physiological fluctuations of this lipid, and
it has thus been suggested that this higher affinity may underlie
the more stable openings characteristic of vascular KATP channels (MacGregor et al., 2002; Quinn et al., 2003). In the context
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 6 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
of EMS, these observations collectively suggest that the mechanisms that engage KATP channels in cells expressing Kir6.2-
containing KATP channels, such as cardiac myocytes, may differ
from Kir6.1-expressing vascular cells. Indeed in the heart, with
its exceptionally high intracellular ATP levels (∼5–10 mM
[Greiner and Glonek, 2021]), modulation of membrane PIP2
levels might play an important role in creating the conditions for
KATP channel engagement. In the vasculature, by contrast, PIP2
concentration-related contributions are much less likely, and it
may be that changes in ATP:ADP ratio come to the fore in this
instance, or that other modulatory events such as coincident
channel phosphorylation are important for KATP activation.
In this vein, a stimulatory effect of protein kinase A (PKA)
has been observed for the activity of Kir6.1-containing channels.
PKA is activated by membrane Gs-coupled GPCRs that convert
ATP into cyclic AMP via adenylyl cyclase, which in turn promotes PKA engagement. PKA phosphorylation of multiple sites
(Ser-1351, Ser-1387) on the pore-forming and regulatory subunits of the KATP channel is known to produce a profound increase in channel open probability (Shi et al., 2007). Similarly,
PKG promotes KATP activation in the neuronal (Kir6.2/SUR1) and
cardiac (Kir6.2/SUR2A) forms of the channel (Han et al., 2001;
Chai and Lin, 2010; Chai et al., 2011), and vascular (Kir6.1/
SUR2B) KATP channels can also be engaged to generate membrane hyperpolarization by stimuli activating guanylyl cyclasecGMP signaling (Kubo et al., 1994; Murphy and Brayden, 1995),
which acts through PKG. In contrast, several consensus protein
kinase C (PKC) sites in the distal C-terminus of Kir6.1 have been
identified that mediate KATP inhibition. PKC is activated downstream of diacylglycerol (DAG), which is produced as a result of
GqPCR engagement and PIP2 hydrolysis. Therefore, activation of
any of the plethora of GqPCRs that are expressed in pericytes
(Hariharan et al., 2020) or cardiac myocytes (Litvinukov ˇ a et al., ´
2020) and other tissues is predicted to inhibit KATP channel
activity in the cell. When the serine residues that are the targets
of PKC phosphorylation (Ser-354, Ser-379, Ser-385, Ser-391, and
Ser-397) are mutated individually, moderate reductions in PKC
inhibition are observed, whereas combined mutation of these
residues produces greater effects, implying that the degree of
phosphorylation of KATP channels by PKC produces a graded
inhibition (Shi et al., 2008), allowing fine-tuning of activity.
In addition to these canonical signaling events, a number of
other modifications are known to affect KATP channel trafficking
and activity, including glycosylation (Conti et al., 2002), nitrosylation (Kawano et al., 2009), myristoylation (Lu et al., 2006),
and palmitoylation (Yang et al., 2020). Combined, these modes
of KATP regulation represent a rich and diverse molecular toolkit
for modifying KATP channel activity and density to influence the
membrane potential of the cell in response to a range of extracellular signals and across broad spatiotemporal domains.
Kir2 channels are central to transmission of electrical signals
Strong inward-rectifier K+ channels of the Kir2 family are
widely expressed and in the vasculature are functionally expressed in the plasma membranes of capillary (Longden et al.,
2017; Harraz et al., 2018a, 2018b) and arteriolar (Ahn et al., 2017;
Sonkusare et al., 2016) ECs and in SMCs (Longden et al., 2014;
Sonkusare et al., 2016). Three Kir2 channel subtypes (Kir2.1–2.3,
encoded by KCNJ2, KCNJ12, and KCNJ4) have been identified and
share similar structural and biophysical features, including their
near complete block by intracellular Mg2+ and polyamines as Vm
is progressively depolarized from EK, and sensitivity to blockade
by external barium (Ba2+) ions (Hibino et al., 2010). The crystal
structure of Kir2.2 (Tao et al., 2009) and more recently a cryoEM structure of Kir2.1 (Fernandes et al., 2022) have been solved,
revealing stunning details of these channels (Fig. 3).
Similar to the pore-forming region of the KATP channels described above, Kir2 channels are formed of tetramers of α
Table 1. Nucleotide and phosphoinositide regulation of KATP channel subtypes
Tissue location
(cell type)a
Subunit
config.
ATP inhibition
(IC50)
MgATP regulation
(EC50/IC50; µM)
MgADP activation
(EC50; µM)
PIP2 affinity
(ΔΔG; kJ/mol)
Refs
Pancreas (β cell) Kir6.2/SUR1 10–20 112–124b 8–11 38 Proks et al. (2010), (2014), Foster and
Coetzee (2016), Pipatpolkai et al. (2020)
Heart (cardiac
myocyte)
Kir6.2/SUR2A 21–100 541b 18 n.d.d Aguilar-Bryan and Bryan (1999),
Tammaro and Ashcroft (2007),
Pratt et al. (2012), Proks et al. (2014),
Foster and Coetzee (2016),
Pipatpolkai et al. (2020)
Vasculature
(smooth muscle)
Kir6.1/SUR2B 29–200 n.d.b 96c n.d.e Davies et al. (2010), Foster and
Coetzee (2016)
a
Note the possibility for a range of KATP isoforms to be expressed in an individual tissue, and that the listed isoforms may be found in other tissues, for example,
the “pancreatic” Kir6.2/SUR1 form of the channel is also found in neurons. b
Italicized text denotes IC50 values. Note that mutant channels (Kir6.2-G334D, Kir6.2-F333I) with reduced ATP sensitivity were used to reveal MgATP
sensitivities, as the effects of MgATP are normally strongly masked by inhibitory effects of free ATP. Similar mutants are needed to study MgATP regulation of
Kir6.1 containing channels in detail.
c
Measured in the presence of 10 µM pinacidil.
dLikely similar to Kir6.2/SUR1, above, as PIP2 binding free energy for Kir6.2 alone is 33 kJ/mol. e
Likely higher than for Kir6.1, as inferred from indirect measures in Quinn et al. (2003).
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 7 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
subunits, each of which has two transmembrane helices (termed
M1 and M2) that are connected via pore-forming loops and intracellular N- and C-termini and lack any accompanying accessory subunits (Fig. 3). The interaction of these channels with
PIP2 is critical for their activity, and readers are referred to
extensive discussion of PIP2 as a key modulator of ion channel
activity in elegant recent works for more detail (Hille et al., 2015;
Harraz et al., 2020). PIP2 binds to the Kir2.1 channel with a KD of
∼3 µM, and it has been proposed that such binding leads to a
conformational change in a conserved 15 amino-acid cytoplasmic motif known as the “G-loop” that leads to channel gating
(Fernandes et al., 2022).
Figure 3. K+ channels at the heart of EMS. (A) Topographic depiction of vascular KATP channel composition showing a two-transmembrane Kir6.1 subunit
alongside its much larger companion 17-transmembrane SUR2B. (B) Side-on cryo-EM density map of the vascular KATP channel in the presence of the inhibitor
glibenclamide. (C) Structural model of the data shown in B, showing the locations of the glibenclamide binding site (Glib), SUR nucleotide-binding domains
(NBDs), ATP binding sites (ATP), and the L0 linker, as well as several transmembrane domains (TMDs). (D) Top-down view of the channel as seen from the
extracellular side. (A–D) Modified with permission from Sung et al. (2021). (E) Side-on (left), top-down (upper right), and bottom-up (lower right) cryo-EM
density maps of the Kir2.1 channel at 4.3 A resolution. ˚ (F) Model of the data in E shows key structural features. K+ ions and blocking strontium ions (which
mimic Mg2+ ions) are shown in the pore in magenta and green, respectively. (G) Top-down model of the channel seen from the extracellular side showing
chains comprising the transmembrane domains in blue and disulfide bridges between subunits in red. (E–G) Modified with permission from Fernandes et al.
(2022).
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 8 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
The other major interaction of Kir2 channels that is essential
for understanding their function is their intracellular block by
polyamines and Mg2+ ions which underlies their strongly rectifying behavior. This has been attributed to two negatively
charged regions of the pore around residue D172 in the M2 helix
(Lu and MacKinnon, 1994) and the E224 and E299 residues close
to the G-loop (Kubo and Murata, 2001). The rings of negative
charge that these residues impart to the channel pore attract
positively charged blocking particles, which in turn is thought to
impair K+ permeation by hindering ion access to the selectivity
filter (Fernandes et al., 2022). As this blockade by polyamines
and Mg2+ depends on voltage, it can as a matter of course be
relived through membrane hyperpolarization toward EK. Hyperpolarization progressively lowers the probability that the
pore is occluded and thereby permits K+ exit from the cell down
the electrochemical gradient to generate outward hyperpolarizing K+ currents. Accordingly, there is a self-amplifying
effect inherent to Kir currents wherein the outward currents
permitted by hyperpolarization generate further hyperpolarization and thereby promote further relief of voltage-dependent
channel blockade (Longden and Nelson, 2015). A similar effect
can be achieved through the elevation of external K+, which
causes a rightward shift in the current–voltage profile of the
channel. In the context of the vasculature, where resting Vm is
between −30 and −40 mV, this rightward shift allows for relief of
the voltage-dependent block of the channel by promoting the
relief of the channel block at these potentials. We and others
have extensively reviewed the biophysical properties of Kir2
channels, and thus readers are directed to these articles for
further information on these topics (Hibino et al., 2010; Longden
and Nelson, 2015).
We argue below that the outward currents through Kir2
channels generated by membrane hyperpolarization, alongside
their K+ sensitivity, are critical for signal transmission from
capillaries during EMS.
The hallmarks of EMS
At its core, the input–output pattern of EMS is reflected in the
conversion of the level of local metabolic demand in a tissue into
electrical signaling throughout the vasculature (Fig. 1). Below,
we discuss three key stages that define this phenomenon: (1) the
generation of metabolic signals and the array of possible forms
they may take; (2) the sensing and transduction mechanisms that
generate vascular electrical signals, along with the propagation
mechanisms for these signals from capillaries to arterioles; and
(3) the homeostatic adjustment of blood flow to deliver energy
substrates to satisfy local metabolic needs.
Stage I: Elevated metabolic activity is the initiating input to EMS
The first hallmark of EMS is that it is driven by an elevation of
metabolic demand in the tissue (Fig. 1). This naturally results in
an array of complex intra- and extracellular modifications which
may act as triggering factors to initiate the adaptive blood flow
changes provided by EMS. Given the wide range of potential
energy sources and the enormous complexity of the cell’s metabolic pathways, there exists a vast array of biochemical signatures that could act as the initiation event for EMS in different
tissues. Here, we focus our discussion on currently known EMS
signals and exciting unexplored possibilities.
Decreased substrate availability as an EMS trigger. Perhaps
operating most directly as an initiating factor, a decrease in local
energy substrate availability due to uptake or depletion during
activity may act as a primary driver of EMS. Indeed, we recently
demonstrated that this is the case for brain glucose, where
capillary pericytes sense and respond to local glucose availability
(Hariharan et al., 2022), and similar mechanisms may exist for
other energy substrates.
Many cells express glucose transporters (GLUTs) to directly
take up glucose from their environment. GLUTs are facilitative
transporters that utilize the gradient of glucose to direct it to
locations of relatively low concentration and have varying kinetics and affinities which can be modulated by intracellular
signaling pathways, such that glucose uptake can be modified in
an activity-dependent manner (Thorens and Mueckler, 2010).
For example, the membrane density of GLUT4 proteins can be
rapidly adjusted in response to signaling events. In muscle and
fat cells, GLUT4 is under the direct control of insulin signaling,
the elevation of which results in rapid membrane insertion of
reserve pools of this transporter stored in submembrane vesicles, thereby rapidly augmenting the glucose import capacity of
the cell (Stockli et al., 2011 ¨ ). Increasing glucose import via such
mechanisms can lead to an increase in the breakdown and oxidation of glucose by active cells, and this can in turn rapidly
change local external glucose concentrations.
Brain regional glucose has been observed to fall ∼30% from
its resting level of ∼1 mM during a maze task (McNay et al.,
2001), presumably due to its rapid uptake by neurons
(Lundgaard et al., 2015; Li et al., 2023) or local astrocytes
(Pellerin and Magistretti, 1994; Rouach et al., 2008), with onset
on the order of seconds (Gold and Korol, 2012). Interestingly, in
aged animals, depletion of local glucose during the same task is
even more extreme, reaching a nadir of ∼50% below resting
levels during task performance (McNay and Gold, 2001), which
could further increase metabolic strain on highly active neurons.
In younger animals, the drop in glucose is typically sustained for
some time during task performance and then corrected back to
baseline levels (McNay et al., 2001), suggesting perhaps that the
initial dearth of glucose could act as a signal to the vasculature to
indicate local metabolic activation and prompt the initiation of
EMS to correct the supply deficit.
Tight control of local glucose is essential in the brain, which
operates as an on-demand system relying almost exclusively on
incoming glucose transported across the blood–brain barrier by
the heavily expressed GLUTs, in particular the GLUT1 isoform
(Deng et al., 2014), located in the endothelium and astrocytic
endfeet (Mergenthaler et al., 2013). A prevailing view is that
glucose is taken up into astrocytic endfeet during neuronal activity via GLUT1 transporters prompted by glutamatergic signaling and glutamate uptake at the tripartite synapse, and this
promotes glycolysis leading to the generation of pyruvate. This
generated pyruvate is then converted to lactate (by lactate dehydrogenase [LDH] 5) in astrocytes, which is passed via monocarboxylate transporters (MCTs 4 and 1) into the extracellular
space, and MCT2 on neurons then permits its uptake into these
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 9 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
cells. It is suggested that the lactate accumulated in neurons is
then converted by resident LDH1 into pyruvate which can enter
the TCA cycle to ultimately generate ATP via oxidative phosphorylation (Mergenthaler et al., 2013). This mechanism has
been termed the astrocyte-neuron lactate shuttle (ANLS).
However, recent studies have questioned the extent to which
neurons depend on astrocytes to provide lactate as a fuel via this
mechanism, as opposed to taking up glucose directly from their
immediate environment and processing this with their own
metabolic machinery (Chuquet et al., 2010; Lundgaard et al.,
2015). Indeed, GLUT3, which has a higher glucose transport
rate than GLUT1 (Simpson et al., 2008), is expressed by neurons
to enable their direct uptake of glucose from the surrounding
parenchyma, and this has led to a counterview in which neurons
process their own glucose for glycolysis and oxidative phosphorylation (Patel et al., 2014; Lundgaard et al., 2015; Peng et al.,
2021), in the process releasing lactate into the extracellular space
(Dienel, 2012). Further work is needed to establish exactly how
glucose is handled by these two cell types.
The brain also maintains a diminutive reservoir of glycogen
(Choi and Gruetter, 2003; Oz et al., 2003 ¨ , 2015; DiNuzzo, 2019),
which accounts for a low percentage of total glucose metabolism
during normal operations and is at least 20 times smaller than
reserves stored in muscle, and 50–100 times lower than that
sequestered in the liver (Ö
z et al., 2007; Obel et al., 2012). Thus,
while the brain appears to depend directly on local glucose on an
as-needed basis, in systems with significant glycogen reserves
these may be mobilized as glucose levels fall to provide sustained
buffering for energy production, and thus EMS may turn on
over a longer and more gradual time scale or may depend on
other triggering factors.
Intriguingly, several GLUT isoforms are expressed directly in
SMCs and pericytes, including transcripts for GLUT1, GLUT3,
and GLUT4 (He et al., 2018; Vanlandewijck et al., 2018). The
relative activity of these transporters could influence the sensitivity of EMS mechanisms embedded in the vasculature. For
example, if GLUT4 transporters are active in the membrane as
opposed to sequestered in reserve pools this could reduce the
sensitivity of vascular EMS mechanisms to glucose fluctuations
by maintaining higher intracellular ATP levels. These possibilities for tuning EMS and their consequences for blood flow
control are intriguing avenues for future investigation.
Cytosolic ATP as a driver of EMS. The major mechanism
through which the energy substrates that are taken into a cell
are converted into ATP is mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation. This process will set the bulk ATP level in the cytosol,
which is typically within the millimolar range, as noted above.
Although many mechanisms exist to protect and maintain cytosolic ATP concentrations, it is possible that subtle fluctuations
in bulk ATP could drive EMS via KATP channel activity.
The organization, function, and regulation of KATP channels
are likely to reflect the EMS mechanisms deployed by a given
cell type. At one extreme are the cardiac ventricular myocytes,
wherein the KATP channel density is extremely high (∼10
channels/µm2
, corresponding to around 50,000 channels per
cell; Nichols and Lederer, 1990). This high expression of the
KATP channel is appropriate for the 5–10 mM cytosolic ATP
concentration estimated from NMR data (Greiner and Glonek,
2021) when considered alongside the low IC50 for ATP at the
cardiac isoform of the KATP channel (∼21–100 µM; Table 1; Foster
and Coetzee, 2016). Having thousands of KATP channels in the
membrane will increase sensitivity to small dips in ATP, which
will likely increase their open probability only marginally. Given
the large single channel current (∼80 pS; Foster and Coetzee,
2016), a single channel opening is capable of deflecting the
membrane potential substantially, and thus this could thus
tightly couple small changes in ATP to EMS mechanisms in
the heart.
Similar measurements are needed to inform our understanding of the possibilities for KATP channel control throughout
the vasculature in pericytes, SMCs, and ECs (and of course also
in other cell types expressing KATP channels), as channel membrane density and intracellular ATP levels and dynamics are
thought to be key parameters that contribute to EMS control
mechanisms. For example, at the opposite extreme to cardiac
myocytes would be a small cell working as a metabolic sentinel to
influence local blood flow by directly modulating electrical activity in the vascular system, like capillary pericytes in the
brain (Hariharan et al., 2022). Such cells would benefit from
having local intracellular machinery to make and control ATP
directly around the channel in a submembrane region of
the cell. Very tight coupling between extracellular substrate
availability and submembrane ATP would thereby allow tight
and responsive control of the KATP channel to rapidly produce
hyperpolarizing electrical signals, a concept we explore in more
detail below.
Glycolytic-KATP channel complexes: Potential EMS signaling
microdomains responding to localized changes intracellular energy
status. Upon entering the cell cytosol glucose is broken down
via a series of 10 enzymatic reactions to produce ATP, pyruvate,
and NADH. Intriguingly, a range of glycolytic enzymes, including aldolase A, pyruvate kinase, triosephosphate isomerase, and
glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) have been
found to be physically associated with KATP channels in cardiac
membranes in studies using a combination of two-hybrid
screening, GST pulldown and immunoprecipitation (DharChowdhury et al., 2005; Jovanovic et al., 2005 ´ ; Hong et al.,
2011). More recently, a glycolytic metabolon regulating the
KATP channel has been described in pancreatic membranes
(Ho et al., 2023). These close associations may provide a
direct means through which highly localized metabolism of
glucose in the submembrane environment could be directly
coupled to KATP activity.
Such local organization to enable compartmentalized communication could be critically important for tight control of KATP
activity, as even during vigorous activity global ATP levels are
closely safeguarded (Balaban, 1986) and thus the global concentration change in a typical cell is minimal. Many intracellular
homeostatic mechanisms have evolved to preserve this high
concentration of available intracellular ATP. Examples abound:
creatine kinase, found in skeletal and heart muscle, in the brain,
and in the mitochondria of various tissues, plays an important
role in producing creatine-phosphate when ATP demands are
low, which acts as an immediately available energy reservoir
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 10 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
that can be drawn upon to generate ATP from ADP during periods of intense work (Yaniv et al., 2010; Metallo and Vander
Heiden, 2013); phosphofructokinase-1 (PFK-1), a rate-limiting
enzyme that performs the third reaction in the glycolytic
chain (Jenkins et al., 2011), is allosterically controlled—when
ATP is replete, PFK-1 is inhibited, but as energy availability falls
within the cell and ADP and AMP levels rise its activity is promoted with the effect of buffering ATP levels by modulating
glycolytic rate which can be tuned over a 100-fold range (Voet
et al., 2016). There are many further examples of regulatory
processes that operate to protect ATP availability, and as such it
is unlikely that a decrease in intracellular ATP per se operates
widely as a trigger of EMS mechanisms. (Although, note the
example of the high density of KATP channels in cardiac membranes in the preceding section, which offers a simple emergent
solution to the problem of sensing subtle changes in ATP.)
As intracellular ADP and AMP levels are typically several
orders of magnitude below ATP in a cell at rest, their relative
variance is much more dramatic during cellular activity. Indeed,
as working muscle ramps its ATP turnover rate, ADP levels have
been estimated to increase as much as fivefold (Allen et al., 1997)
and AMP levels even more so (McConell et al., 2020). The
combination of relatively stable ATP levels as a backdrop against
substantial relative changes in ADP thus decreases the ATP:ADP
ratio—a key intracellular energy parameter that influences a
wide range of intracellular metabolic activities which may be
more likely to be a key EMS cue. Recently, the development
of a highly sensitive reporter of ATP:ADP ratio, PercevalHR
(Tantama et al., 2013), has allowed for the first single-cell resolution observations of changes in this metabolic indicator. Intriguingly, this sensor revealed that decreases in external
glucose around neurons within the physiological range result in
a substantial decrease in ATP:ADP ratio. Electrical activity was
also directly linked to changes in ratio, and these were directly
linked to hyperpolarization of the membrane through the engagement of KATP channels (Tantama et al., 2013). As such,
activity-induced changes in ATP:ADP ratio primarily resulting
from relative changes in ADP concentrations likely represent a
more labile metabolic parameter than bulk ATP that can be
rapidly converted into robust electrical activity in cells expressing KATP channels, which could be a central trigger for
blood flow increases in EMS. In vascular cells expressing KATP
for example, it is anticipated that the ATP:ADP ratio will tilt in
favor of channel activation (i.e., higher ADP, lower ATP) during
local substrate depletion in the tissue to generate electrical signals and promote hyperemia.
Returning to the observation that KATP channels physically
associate with glycolytic machinery, the substrates of aldolase
and pyruvate kinase were both shown to suppress KATP channel
activity in excised membrane patches (Hong et al., 2011), and
these observations are buttressed by similar findings in vesicles
containing KATP channels derived from small intestine epithelial
cells (Dubinsky et al., 1998). It thus follows that the glycolytic
machinery of the cell may constitute part of a macromolecular
signaling complex organized around KATP channels that tightly
regulates their activity. A decrease in glycolysis could trigger a
rapid increase in microdomain ADP around the channel (and
potentially a fall in submembrane ATP), which could increase
KATP activity. Accordingly, the KATP channel in certain situations
may be set up to sense a functionally compartmentalized ATP:
ADP ratio in the submembrane region around the channel, as
opposed to that of the bulk cytoplasm. Such a privileged environment would presumably serve to amplify subtle changes in
metabolism and enable the KATP channel to be rapidly responsive. A number of studies also suggest that the sodium/potassium (Na+/K+) ATPase is associated with this membrane complex
of glycolytic enzymes and KATP channels, which may add a further dimension to this organization (Urbach et al., 1996; Schultz,
1997; Dubinsky et al., 1998; Sepp et al., 2014): ATP from microdomain glycolysis could fuel pumping activity to restore Na+ and
K+ levels after membrane potential deviations. Such increases in
Na+/K+ ATPase activity would be expected to affect the local ATP:
ADP ratio and increase KATP channel activity. While it is yet to
be determined whether such highly localized glycolytic-KATP
channel complexes contribute to EMS, this is an intuitive and
appealing possibility.
Beyond glucose, variations in the availability of other energy
substrates could trigger EMS through similar principles but the
involvement of distinct molecular players. The heart, in contrast
to the brain, has been described as “omnivorous,” in that it
generates ATP from an array of substrates (Wende et al., 2017).
Under normal conditions in healthy adults, free fatty acid oxidation takes center-stage in heart metabolism, generating
acetyl-coA, which is then utilized to produce ATP via oxidative
phosphorylation. In contrast, catabolism of glucose makes only a
small contribution to cardiac energy under working conditions
(e.g., only 5% of ATP is produced by glycolysis), but this balance
may shift when the heart is under stress. Further contributions
to heart metabolism are provided by amino acids, ketone bodies,
and circulating lactate (Ritterhoff and Tian, 2017).
The kidney also has incredibly high energy demands, turning
over large amounts of ATP to enable its roles in filtering waste
from the blood, reabsorbing nutrients, and regulating pH and
blood pressure. This organ exhibits regional dependence on
energy substrate preference, with the proximal tubules in the
renal cortex relying on the oxidation of free fatty acids to generate large amounts of ATP to accommodate the high level of
water and solute transport occurring at this location (indeed, the
complete β-oxidation of a fatty acid molecule is more energetically lucrative than glucose oxidation—for example, the 16-
carbon fatty acid palmitate will yield 106 ATP versus ∼32 ATP
per glucose molecule). The lower O2 environment of the medulla
and distal tubules relies instead on glucose for glycolysis (Alsahli
and Gerich, 2017; Bhargava and Schnellmann, 2017). These
variances in energy preferences across organs, locally within
tissues, and under different circumstances thus raise the possibility that fluctuations in local availability of a range of energy
substrates may alter intracellular energy status to then activate
EMS in a substrate-tailored and location-dependent manner.
Metabolically driven release of mediators. Increased metabolic
activity may also drive the release of canonical vasodilatory
mediators from active tissue. These may include (but are not
limited to) adenosine, which is a direct product of the breakdown of ATP via ADP and AMP and is released in the brain (Wall
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 11 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
and Dale, 2008; Wu et al., 2023), skeletal muscle (Hellsten et al.,
1998), and heart during increased activity (Hori and Kitakaze,
1991); K+ which, while not a direct metabolic byproduct, is released during action potentials and thus accurately reflects local
activity in electrically active tissues (Ballanyi et al., 1996;
Rasmussen et al., 2019); and NO, a diffusible gas which is produced in response to Ca2+ elevations in metabolically active tissues such as the brain (Garthwaite, 2019) and skeletal muscle
(Stamler and Meissner, 2001). The documentation of metabolically driven mediators is underway in a range of tissues, and a
full accounting of these will be necessary to gain a complete
understanding of the diverse EMS mechanisms throughout tissues, several of which may operate in parallel to ensure
the fidelity of energy delivery in response to changes in local
metabolism. One mediator that is a direct product of metabolism and is therefore well suited for EMS is lactate.
Lactate as a signaling molecule. Pyruvate generated during
glycolysis can be metabolized by LDH enzymes to lactic acid
which ionizes to form lactate, at the same time generating NAD+.
This is a reversible reaction in which lactate and NAD+ can also
be converted into NADH and pyruvate. In the brain, the reversibility of this reaction forms the basis of the ANLS model,
although observations of lactate flux favoring brain exit to the
circulation have questioned the extent to which this mechanism
is favored for neuronal ATP generation (Dienel, 2012). Nevertheless, lactate levels in the brain clearly do increase during
activity (Prichard et al., 1991; Hu and Wilson, 1997a, 1997b), and
interestingly the activity of KATP channels in neocortical neurons has been shown to be modulated by the level of extracellular lactate, with its accumulation inhibiting KATP channels
composed of Kir6.2 and SUR1 subunits after its transport into
cells and subsequent metabolism, thus depolarizing the cell
membrane and increasing firing rate (Karagiannis et al., 2021).
Intriguingly, activation of vascular KATP channels by intracellular lactate has been observed in SMCs (Han et al., 1993), resulting instead in membrane hyperpolarization. These disparate
observations raise the need for further work to determine the
precise fate of lactate in the brain and delineate the responses of
different cells of the neurovascular unit to local extra- and intracellular lactate levels and establish underlying mechanisms.
One consistent observation, however, is that accumulation of
lactate causes vasodilation of local arterioles and arterioleproximate capillaries through several mechanisms including
modulation of contractile pericyte Ca2+ (Yamanishi et al., 2006),
nitric oxide (NO)–dependent activation of vascular KATP channels (Hein et al., 2006), and the actions of extracellular prostaglandin E2 (Gordon et al., 2008). While further work is needed to
determine the relative contributions of these mechanisms to
blood flow control in arterioles and throughout the capillary bed,
these observations suggest that the increases in lactate that occur in the brain during concerted activity can be sensed by the
vasculature and converted into hyperemia, thus fitting the
profile of an EMS signaling molecule.
Beyond the flow of brain lactate into the vascular system, the
levels of lactate in the blood are strongly correlated to the level of
lactate in working muscle, and a major fate of this molecule is to
be transported to the liver where it is used to synthesize glucose
or glycogen through the processes of gluconeogenesis and glyconeogenesis (Rui, 2014). However, it is also evident that circulating lactate can be directly taken up by cells as a carbon
source (Quistorff et al., 2020) and this raises the possibility
of whole-organism activity and energy state regulating EMS
broadly throughout a number of tissues. For example, during
intense whole-animal activity, the release of lactate could act as
an EMS trigger in skeletal muscle as noted in the previous section, and the increase in circulating lactate could also drive EMS
through its import into the heart (Duncker and Bache, 2008) and
brain, if the blood concentration is sufficiently high enough to
favor influx (Quistorff et al., 2020). Such a mechanism for lactate triggering coordinated blood flow increases across multiple
organs could serve to rapidly optimize energy delivery during
activity and represents an intriguing avenue for further
exploration.
Gases as metabolic indicators: pO2 and pCO2. Oxidative metabolic pathways converge on the generation of acetyl-coA in the
mitochondria for further metabolic processing via the TCA cycle
to generate electron donors for the ETC, with O2 acting as the
ultimate electron acceptor resulting in its reduction to H2O. This
process of electron transfer generates a large H+ gradient across
the inner mitochondrial membrane, culminating in the generation of ATP through the activity of the ATP synthase (Fig. 2). As
oxidative phosphorylation is dependent on O2, its local partial
pressure (pO2) can dictate the energy production means of the
cell and thus exert influence over the metabolic state.
It is well established that hypoxia acts as a potent vasodilatory stimulus, and seminal studies have demonstrated that
arterial diameter can be bidirectionally modulated as an inverse
function of local pO2 (Jackson, 2016). However, as has been
extensively discussed elsewhere (Taggart and Wray, 1998;
Jackson, 2016), the precise molecular mechanisms through
which decreases in pO2 trigger dilations are not known. Is also
unknown whether hypoxia engages electrical signaling in the
capillary bed, but it seems possible that similar mechanisms to
those evoking arteriolar smooth muscle hyperpolarization may
have evolved in this region of the vasculature to facilitate
communication upstream to control arteriole and proximal
capillary diameter and regulate blood flow in response to local
O2 fluctuations.
In the brain, state-of-the-art measurements of pO2 have recently challenged the controversial view that hyperemiainduced increases in local pO2 are preceded by an initial dip
(Kim et al., 2000; Logothetis, 2000; Buxton, 2001; Lindauer
et al., 2001b; Vanzetta and Grinvald, 2001; Thompson et al.,
2003, 2004; Kasischke et al., 2004; Dunn et al., 2005;
Offenhauser et al., 2005; Sirotin et al., 2009; Hu and Yacoub,
2012; Ma et al., 2016; Aydin et al., 2022), which has been postulated to be driven by increased neuronal metabolism during
activity. Instead, recent data support the view that O2 tension is
initially unchanged by the initiation of neuronal activity and is
then followed by a large influx in O2 during hyperemia (Aydin
et al., 2022). Furthermore, classic positron-emission tomography
experiments have convincingly demonstrated that activityevoked increases in neuronal activity are not associated with
significant increases in O2 consumption but are accompanied by
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 12 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
increased glucose utilization—leading to the hypothesis that
aerobic glycolysis predominates as a mechanism to rapidly
supply energy during sudden increases in brain activity (Raichle
and Mintun, 2006). Accordingly, it appears unlikely that changes
in local pO2 would operate as a trigger of EMS in this organ.
However, in tissues that routinely experience local or global
periods of anaerobic work (e.g., exercising skeletal muscle), pO2
could be an important driver of EMS. Taking the example of
skeletal muscle further, the energetic demands imposed by intensive work here lead to periods in which O2 demand outstrips
supply. In addition to the immediate and rapid ATP supply
provided by the skeletal muscle phosphagen system, glycolysis
predominates during such periods due to the rate at which it can
be rapidly ramped up to produce ATP. Mitochondrial respiration
is comparatively slow as a means of energy production (Baker
et al., 2010), and the decline in intracellular pO2 imposed by the
high energetic demand imposed by intense exercise (Richardson
et al., 1995; Wagner, 2012) will reduce the ability of this system to
supply ATP to meet local needs. During such periods, decreased
intracellular pO2 may act as a direct trigger of EMS by increasing
the production or availability of feed-forward hyperpolarizing/
vasodilating molecules such as prostaglandins and NO (Jackson,
2016). However, the mechanisms for O2-dependent production
of these mediators are not clear and require further experimental attention, but it has been speculated that prostaglandin
production may involve O2-dependent oxidation and inhibition
of upstream cyclooxygenase enzymes (Jackson, 2016).
An interesting layer of pO2-mediated blood flow control can
also be envisioned for extended bouts of hypoxia, where transcriptional changes evoked by the engagement of hypoxiainducible factor (HIF-1; Majmundar et al., 2010; Yuan et al.,
2013) could serve to tune EMS elements and modulate the sensitivity of this system. HIF-1 consists of HIF-1α and HIF-1β subunits, which respond to hypoxia by modulating the expression
of >100 downstream genes (Weidemann and Johnson, 2008;
Masoud and Li, 2015). Notably, hypoxia has been associated with
HIF-1–mediated upregulation of Kir6.1/SUR2 KATP channel expression (Raeis et al., 2010). A resultant increase in functional
protein at the membrane surface could thus serve to amplify
EMS responses in the affected tissue. Moreover, HIF-mediated
increases in Kir2.1 (central to EMS signal transmission, see below)
have also been reported (Yamamura et al., 2018). Further work is
needed to survey the tissue locations and circumstances in which
drops in pO2 act to promote vasodilation and to establish the
precise molecular mechanisms through which this leads ultimately to SMC membrane hyperpolarization and vasodilation.
Exploring the full impact of hypoxia on EMS signaling pathways is
thus an intriguing avenue for experimental investigation.
An obligate byproduct of aerobic metabolic activity is CO2,
which is produced during the cyclical processing of citrate to
oxaloacetate during the TCA cycle. As a gas, CO2 diffuses from its
point source of production and is ultimately removed from the
blood. Accordingly, CO2 readily passes through the SMCs, ECs,
and pericytes of the vasculature, which may have intrinsic
mechanisms to detect local pCO2. In addition to binding to deoxygenated RBCs and being secreted via ventilation, a major
fate of CO2 is to be processed by the large family of carbonic
anhydrase metalloenzymes, which catalyze the interconversion
of CO2 and H2O to carbonic acid (H2CO3) which can, in turn,
dissociate to form bicarbonate ions (HCO3−) and protons (H+).
Normally, pCO2 in the tissue is tightly controlled at around 40
mmHg (Patel and Sharma, 2023). During an increase in oxidative metabolic activity, the increase in CO2 generated can result
in an increase in H+ concentration, decreasing pH. The cerebral
circulation is remarkably sensitive to CO2-induced acidification,
with most vessels exhibiting rapid dilation to acidosis through
multiple mechanisms detailed below and as such, hypercapnia
produces robust blood flow responses in the brain and appears
to play a major role in the process of neurovascular coupling
(Hosford et al., 2022). At the arteriolar level, a central mechanism through which this occurs is the conversion of cytosolic Ca2+
waves to Ca2+ sparks in SMCs which activate large-conductance
Ca2+ activated K+ (BK) channels to hyperpolarize the membrane
(Dabertrand et al., 2012), likely through a decrease in the open
probability of ryanodine receptors (RyRs) in the sarcoplasmic
reticulum (Wray and Burdyga, 2010). H+ ions can also decrease the activity of L-type voltage-dependent Ca2+ channels
(VDCCs; West et al., 1992), increase the generation of NO
(Lindauer et al., 2001a), and stimulate KATP channels (Wang
et al., 2003). An exception to these responses in the cerebral
circulation is the arterioles of the brainstem retrotrapezoid
nucleus, a key chemosensory region responsible for regulating ventilation in response to changes in blood pH (Cleary
et al., 2020). Here, CO2 drives a decrease in vessel diameter,
which is thought to concentrate the CO2/H+ stimulus for
chemosensing neurons, thus ensuring a more robust increase
in ventilation to clear excess CO2.
The circulation in a range of peripheral organs also exhibits
sensitivity to hypercapnia. In the coronary vasculature, stimulation of NO generation is thought to play an important role in
mediating dilation in response to increased pCO2 (Heintz et al.,
2005; Tzou et al., 2007), and similar mechanisms have been
suggested in the brachial artery (de Matthaeis et al., 2014). In the
mesenteric arteries of the intestines, hypercapnic vasodilation
has been attributed to KATP channel engagement promoting
membrane hyperpolarization (Wang et al., 2003). In skeletal
muscle, as discussed above, acidosis and increases in CO2 up to
10% cause vasodilation and elevate blood flow (Lamb et al., 1966;
Charter et al., 2018). In the kidney, which plays a central role in
acid-base balance of the blood stream, hypercapnia instead induces vasoconstrictor responses and decreases renal blood flow
through mechanisms that have not been fully clarified but appear to involve activation of the renal nerve (Norman et al., 1970;
Chapman et al., 2020). Thus, in the context of EMS CO2 likely
plays distinct tissue-dependent roles, with many organs (brain,
heart, skeletal muscle) equipped to respond to increases in CO2/
H+ and resultant acidosis by generating membrane hyperpolarization to increase blood flow.
Redox state. Reactive oxygen species (ROS) are highly reactive O2-containing molecules that are generated during oxidative phosphorylation in mitochondria through electron leak,
resulting in the reduction of molecular O2, and by NADPH oxidases in the cytosol. ROS play important physiological signaling
roles within cells and common species include superoxide anion
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 13 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
radicals (O2·
−), hydroxyl radicals (·OH), and nonradical oxidants
such as hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) and singlet oxygen (1
O2). In
addition to their roles in varied processes such as signal transduction and control of gene expression (Nose, 2000; Forman
et al., 2010; Checa and Aran, 2020), during heightened activity
ROS production can exceed the capacity of antioxidant mechanisms in the cell, allowing these molecules to build to disruptive
levels. This accumulation damages DNA and proteins and interferes with the operation of important signaling pathways
such as NO-mediated communication (Forstermann, 2010 ¨ ; Checa
and Aran, 2020). Redox homeostasis is thus a critical factor in
ensuring the continued smooth functioning of cells on a moment-to-moment basis.
Interestingly, important roles for NADPH oxidases 2 and 4
(NOX2; NOX4)—key sources of cytosolic ROS—in endothelialdependent vasodilation have been reported. In cerebral arteries,
endothelial NOX2 is associated with transient receptor potential ankyrin 1 (TRPA1) channels, which respond to NOX2-
derived ROS with Ca2+ signals that couple to EC small- and
intermediate-conductance Ca2+-activated K+ channels to produce
vasodilation (Sullivan et al., 2015). Importantly, TRPA1 channels
in capillary endothelial cells have also recently been shown to
contribute the capillary-to-arteriole electrical signaling in the
brain (Thakore et al., 2021), raising the possibility for ROSinitiated long-distance communication within the vasculature.
NOX4 has also been observed in ECs (and also appears to be
expressed by some pericytes [He et al., 2018; Vanlandewijck
et al., 2018]) and has been proposed to drive membrane hyperpolarization through the generation of H2O2 (Ray et al., 2011),
which promotes the activity of KATP and Ca2+-activated K+
channels (Bychkov et al., 1999; Matoba et al., 2000; Dantzler
et al., 2019). As H2O2 is able to readily permeate membranes, it
could also act as an intercellular indicator of redox status and as a
signaling molecule, although its brief half-life likely limits its
active range prior to decomposition (Lennicke et al., 2015; Ledo
et al., 2022). These observations support the possibility that
changes in tissue redox state brought about by increases in oxidative metabolism or membrane NADPH oxidase activity may
couple directly to electrical activity, which in the vasculature
could be translated into increases in blood flow. The resultant
incoming blood might not only provide further energy substrates
for metabolism but could also serve a homeostatic function by
delivering circulating antioxidant molecules to active tissues to
redress redox balance. Experiments involving direct measurements of ROS levels during tissue activity changes, and manipulation of their levels in conjunction with blood flow measurements
are needed to test these ideas which likely necessitates the development of new and more sensitive indicators.
The foregoing provides a non-exhaustive outline of known
and unexplored but potentially important EMS triggers. Following the triggering event, a membrane electrical signal must
next be generated that can ultimately influence blood flow.
Stage II: Chemical-to-electrical transduction and propagation
mechanisms underpin EMS
Upon detection of biochemical changes resulting from elevated
metabolic activity in a tissue, the second stage of EMS centers on
the conversion of this initiating factor into an electrical signal in
the vasculature that can propagate to reach from the initiation
site through multiple vessel branches to contractile mural cells
(Box 1). Alternatively, the process of electrical signal generation
could also occur directly in arterioles if the initiating cells are
suitably proximal, although, in general, this is likely to be secondary, simply due to the relative paucity of spatial coverage by
arterioles and the much more extensive arborization of the
capillaries that forms the bulk of the vasculature throughout all
tissues (Fig. 4). This close association with working cells thus
ideally positions capillaries as the primary sensors and responders to local activity (Gould et al., 2017).
K+ channels as signal generators. In many excitable cells,
electrical signaling takes the form of regenerative, propagating
depolarizations that characterize action potentials (e.g., cardiac
myocytes, neurons, pancreatic β cells, and gut smooth muscle)
generated by Na+- or Ca2+-permeable channels. In the vasculature, the organization of electrical signaling could be conceived
of as being “inverted,” with the dominant role played by hyperpolarizations generated through K+ channel activity. Below,
we outline studies supporting this conception of electrical signaling throughout the vasculature.
KATP channels generate signals in response to energy
deficits. Recently, we found that KATP channels take center stage
in generating electrical signals in capillaries, which are then
transmitted over long distances during EMS in the brain and
heart. In the brain, the pericytes found on the abluminal wall of
the capillaries greatly extend the sensory capabilities of the
vessels by imbuing them with the ability to directly respond to
the availability of local glucose (see Stage I, above) and likely a
broad range of other signals through their repertoire of G
protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) and ion channels (Hariharan
et al., 2020). Analysis of recent brain single-cell RNAseq data
revealed that KATP channels account for nearly half of the total
expression of all ion channel genes in these pericytes (Hariharan
et al., 2020) and acts as a reliable marker of these cells in mice
(He et al., 2018; Vanlandewijck et al., 2018). These channels are
also expressed by human pericytes (Crouch et al., 2022; Yang
et al., 2022; although note that not all studies find enrichment of
KATP genes in humans [Song et al., 2020]) and have recently
been shown to be functional in mouse brain and retinal pericytes (Sancho et al., 2022). We thus examined the role of these
channels in pericyte-mediated control of blood flow and strikingly, our studies suggest that the electrical signal resulting from
the activation of KATP channels in a single pericyte is capable of
exerting robust control of upstream capillaries covered by
contractile pericytes and arterioles and can be triggered by a fall
in local glucose availability (Hariharan et al., 2022). This KATP
channel-dependent basis for EMS extends to other tissues, with
a variant having initially been detected by us in the heart (Zhao
et al., 2020a), where KATP channels positioned in cardiac myocytes are electrically coupled to adjacent capillary ECs. Here, as
the work of cardiac myocytes increases, impacting intracellular
energy status, KATP channel open probability increases, and this
drives membrane hyperpolarization which is likely passed via a
small number of gap junctions from the cardiac myocyte to
its surrounding capillaries. From here, the signal can spread
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 14 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
throughout the vasculature to modulate blood flow (Longden
et al., 2023). Similar mechanisms may also operate in other
tissues in which KATP channels play important signaling roles
such as the pancreas or skeletal muscle. Accordingly, we posit
that KATP channels activated by a wide variety of metabolic
signals (see Stage I) operate as the central node in the EMS
signaling network generating electrical signals to influence
blood flow.
In addition to KATP channels, other K+ channels known to be
expressed throughout the vasculature might also contribute to
electrical signal generation. For example, in the arteriolar endothelium, small- and intermediate-conductance Ca2+-activated
Figure 4. EMS transmission mechanisms. (A) Comparison of the vascular volume in a 1 mm3 block of cortical tissue comprised by surface arteries, penetrating arterioles, and the capillary bed. Capillaries comprise about 85% of the vasculature by volume, with the penetrating arterioles contributing just 3%.
Thus, the capillaries are ideally positioned to act as a sensory array communicating information on tissue activity to the arterioles to regulate blood flow.
Adapted with permission from Gould et al. (2017). (B) The central image depicts an arteriole lined by arterial endothelial cells (aECs) and surrounded by smooth
muscle cells (SMCs). Downstream of this emerge capillaries, the proximal branches of which are covered in contractile pericytes. Deeper downstream branches
are covered by thin-strand pericytes. The dotted box depicts events leading to the initiation of EMS in the capillary bed, leading to the generation and
transmission of hyperpolarizing signals. In inset i (middle), a specific example is given for a decrease in glucose availability based on Hariharan et al. (2022),
which engages KATP channels. This hyperpolarization can be passed via gap junctions (GJs) into the underlying capillary endothelial cells (cECs), which may then
transmit the signal upstream via the mechanism depicted in inset ii (bottom). Here, hyperpolarization in the endothelium relieves the voltage-dependent block
of Kir2.1 channels by polyamines, leading to K+ efflux and regeneration of membrane hyperpolarization through the engagement of further Kir2.1 channels as
the signal travels upstream. Once it arrives in the proximal capillaries and arteriolar segment (inset iii, top), the electrical signal can be transmitted via gap
junctions into both the contractile pericytes and upstream SMCs, where its arrival decreases the open probability of voltage-dependent Ca2+ channels and
produces a decrease in intracellular Ca2+ which relaxes the Ca2+-sensitive contractile machinery and promotes vasodilation and an increase in blood flow.
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 15 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
K+ channels are engaged during Ca2+ elevations. The resultant
hyperpolarization can be transmitted to the underlying SMCs
via gap junction-containing myo-endothelial projections—
specialized points of contact between ECs and SMCs through the
fenestrated internal elastic lamina of these vessels. These
channels may thus also contribute to EMS as signal generators or
boosters, and further work is needed to address whether this is
the case. Yet other K+ channel isoforms in the endothelium,
pericytes, and smooth muscle (e.g., KV and BK channels in the
latter [Brayden and Nelson, 1992; Straub et al., 2009; Jackson,
2017]) could also contribute to this process. It is also possible that
some capillary conducted responses may be fully or partially
Ca2+-mediated. For example, recent work (Thakore et al., 2021)
has shown TRPA1-initiated Ca2+ signals spreading throughout
capillaries—via pannexin hemichannel release of ATP in turn
activating P2X receptors on endothelial cells—at ∼35 µm/s, ultimately activating SK and IK channels which then generate
electrical signals for the upstream arteriole.
Kir2.1 channels mediate signal propagation through the
vasculature. Once a hyperpolarizing electrical signal has been
generated in response to metabolic activity, it must be
transmitted—in some cases over long distances—to reach upstream capillaries and arterioles covered with contractile cells
(Box 1) to drive their relaxation. In the brain, we initially
characterized this process in capillary ECs, which express the
strong-inward rectifier K+ (Kir2.1) channel (Longden and Nelson,
2015; Longden et al., 2017; Harraz et al., 2018a; Moshkforoush
et al., 2020). This channel responds directly to both increases in
external K+ and, importantly, hyperpolarization (Longden and
Nelson, 2015). These stimuli can relieve the voltage-dependent
block of Kir2.1 channels by the positively charged intracellular
polyamines (such as spermine and putrescine) and Mg2+ that
produce their characteristic inwardly rectifying current–voltage
relationship. The blocking process here likely results from a
combination of charge screening through the interaction of
polyamines with key residues in the channels’ inner vestibule
outlined above, lowering the K+ permeation rate, along with
direct pore occlusion at more depolarized potentials (Xie et al.,
2002). The process of blockade relief by K+ elevation and/or an
initial hyperpolarization can generate a feed-forward effect
that—if it overcomes the background depolarizing conductances
of the cell (Tsoukias et al., 2007)—can rapidly drive the membrane potential to close to the K+ equilibrium potential (EK)
through K+ efflux (Longden and Nelson, 2015). These properties
of Kir2.1 and its expression throughout the capillary endothelium form the basis for a minimal regenerative electrical signaling system that allows for the long-range transmission of
hyperpolarizations. Conceptually, injection of sufficient current
into an endothelial cell at any point in a capillary network could
be passed via gap junctions (likely composed of connexins 43 and
45; He et al., 2018; Vanlandewijck et al., 2018; Hariharan et al.,
2020) into adjacent endothelial cells where it can regenerate
itself through the unblocking of resident Kir2.1 channels in the
next cell. In principle, this process can generate electrical signals
that can traverse long vascular distances to reach the upstream
supplying arteriole to drive (Fig. 4). Evidence for such a capillary-to-arteriole signaling system has now been provided by a
number of studies in both brain and heart (Longden et al., 2017,
2023; Zhao et al., 2020a; Hariharan et al., 2022), and similar
findings have emerged in skeletal muscle (Lamb et al., 2018).
Moreover, studies in arterioles have provided evidence for longrange conduction at this level of the vascular bed (Emerson and
Segal, 2001), and these electrical signals can be readily transferred from ECs to SMCs (Yamamoto et al., 1999; Sonkusare
et al., 2016). It is likely that similar mechanisms operate in
other tissues and further studies are needed to address this
possibility.
The heart is distinct from the brain in that direct current
injection from the cardiac myocyte through a sparse set of gap
junctions could provide a low-pass filtered current source for
hyperpolarizing or depolarizing changes in capillary voltage.
Direct measurements of voltage are needed in all cell types, and
implementing novel imaging tools such as genetically encoded
voltage indicators to enable these measurements is therefore
essential.
Together, the K+ channels that act as signal generators for
EMS—primarily KATP channels—pass signals on to the Kir2.1
channels that mediate distance transmission of electrical signals
through the vascular network to enable the precise delivery of
blood to the tissue in the third and final stage of this process.
Stage III: Hyperpolarizing electrical signaling adjusts blood flow as
the homeostatic output of EMS
After its transmission through the capillary network, an electrical signal will arrive at vascular branches covered with contractile cells—either contractile pericytes in the proximal
branches of the capillary bed or SMCs covering arterioles and
arteries. The mechanisms governing contractile pericyte contraction and relaxation have not been elucidated in detail, but
given their expression of α-SMA (Box 1) and the presence of
functional VDCCs (Gonzales et al., 2020), these are likely to be
relatively similar to those of upstream SMCs, which we focus on
here (although it is noteworthy that differences in the ion
channel complement and relative expression of several proteins
have been reported between these two cell types which likely
contribute to functional differences [Gonzales et al., 2020;
Ratelade et al., 2020]).
In SMCs, the interplay between membrane potential and
intracellular Ca2+ is critically important. An electrical signal
arriving at the arteriolar endothelium can be readily transferred to the smooth muscle via gap junction-containing
myoendothelial projections, as noted above. This handover of
hyperpolarization in turn will close L-type voltage-gated Ca2+
channels (VGCCs) embedded in the sarcolemma, which in turn
decreases global intracellular Ca2+. In SMCs, global Ca2+ levels
are sensed by calmodulin, which influences the activity of myosin light chain kinase, which transfers phosphates from ATP to
the myosin head group to enable its interaction with actin fibers
in the process of actin–myosin crossbridge cycling. Accordingly,
a fall in Ca2+ in the SMC resulting from VGCC closure will interrupt this process, leading to a relaxation of the contractile
machinery. This process playing out through many cells along
the length of the vessel in response to a vasodilatory stimulus
leads to dilation of the arteriole and an increase in blood flow.
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 16 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
The magnitude and reach of an arriving electrical signal will
determine the resolution of the blood flow response. Here, the
steep relationship between membrane potential and SMC tone
will dictate the size of the resultant diameter change. In pressurized cerebral arteries, SMC membrane potential is roughly
−40 mV under resting conditions (Knot and Nelson, 1998),
which closely aligns also with the resting potentials of capillary
endothelial cells and pericytes (Hariharan et al., 2022; Sancho
et al., 2022). At −60 mV, these arteries are almost maximally
dilated, and thus arriving signals with a magnitude within this
20-mV range produce a nearly linear effect on vessel diameter
which exponentially amplifies blood flow as a product of the
fourth power of the vessel radius, as described by the HagenPoiseuille equation. This voltage–diameter relationship is well
supported in cerebral arteries and has also been explored in
detail in arteries from hamster cheek pouch and intestine (Xia
and Duling, 1998) and skeletal muscle (Wolfle et al., 2011 ¨ ). Indeed, in the latter, vessels are maximally constricted at approximately −35 mV and maximally dilated at approximately
−50 mV, further illustrating the incredibly sensitive relationship
between vessel diameter and membrane voltage (Kotecha and
Hill, 2005). It will be important to fully elucidate these relationships for arterioles controlling blood flow to capillary beds in
each tissue of interest, as differences in expression and environment may influence their range, linearity, and steepness
which consequently shapes the hemodynamic response.
If a signal is transmitted from capillaries in a metabolically
active area to a feed arteriole that has multiple capillary offshoots along its length, the bulk increase in blood flow through
the artery in response to its dilation could be expected to be
distributed throughout all capillaries emanating from this vessel
(Fig. 5). In contrast, if a signal reaches only the contractile
pericyte-covered capillary nearest to its point of origin (i.e.,
reaches the proximal capillaries but not the arteriole itself),
the blood flow increase resulting from the dilating capillary
would be expected to be much smaller and more localized, being
a product of the dilating capillary diverting blood away from
other areas of the network by modifying the path-of-least-resistance for flow (and absent a global increase in blood flow
elicited by dilating the feed arteriole). Thus, the resolution of the
blood delivery through the capillary network (i.e., the number of
branches experiencing hyperemia) is predicted to be a function
of the reach (i.e., length constant) and magnitude of electrical
signals, assuming no changes in other ongoing processes (Fig. 5).
However, the α-SMA-expressing precapillary sphincters found
at the point of transition from arteriole to capillary in multiple
capillary beds including those of the brain (He et al., 2010; Grubb
et al., 2020), heart (Anderson and Anderson, 1980), and skeletal
muscle (Rhodin, 1967) also likely play an important role in
controlling hyperemic resolution at this level of the vascular tree
through moment-to-moment modification of their contractile
state. An electrical signal arriving from a capillary tree in an
active area of tissue is expected to open the gateway sphincter as
it passes into the arteriole, while other sphincters controlling
flow to other non-electrically active capillary networks fed by
the same arteriole remain closed. This would accordingly promote a preferential distribution of blood to the capillaries in the
active region downstream of the relaxing sphincter. As long as
the sphincters controlling the access of blood to other capillary
offshoots remain constricted at the same time, this should amplify blood flow to the electrically active capillaries while minimizing the perturbation of flow through capillaries in areas that
are not currently generating EMS signals. There are likely even
more mechanisms for modifying flow pathways through the
capillaries. For example, signals inducing slow or tonic constrictions of thin-strand pericytes (Fernandez-Klett et al., 2010 ´ ;
Hartmann et al., 2021) may selectively narrow certain vessels to
alter the path of least resistance through the capillary bed over
longer time scales. Furthermore, data indicating that contractile
pericytes located at branch points can independently regulate
perfusion through the daughter branches they cover suggest
that the regulation of blood distribution is highly complex and
controlled at multiple levels (Gonzales et al., 2020). Fully
studying all such possibilities will be necessary to arrive at a
model that captures the complexity of the regulation of blood
flow through capillary networks. It is also interesting to consider
that electrical signals arriving at the venous side of the vasculature could be an important component of EMS. Detailed
information on the flow of electrical signals through threedimensional vascular networks in combination with dynamic
tissue activity, vessel diameter, and blood flow measurements is
thus a critically important development that is needed to fully
understand exactly how these blood delivery issues are handled
across tissues and under varying metabolic loads.
The shape of the blood flow response will be influenced thus
by the length constant of an electrical signal, and also its magnitude and duration. In vivo, the duration of arriving electrical
signals will likely differ depending on the tissue, the type of
activity for which blood is being supplied, and the specific molecular setup of the local vasculature, among other factors.
Broadly, electrical signaling could operate in either analog or
digital modes. In the brain, present data suggest that the electrical signaling component of EMS in response to local activity
most closely resembles a digital electrical signal (Fig. 4), which
propagates in a regenerative fashion through the vasculature to
drive upstream dilation and increase blood flow. These signals
have rapid on- and off-kinetics and their duration is tied closely
to the length of the stimulus. This digital signal analogy is supported by data indicating an all-or-none property of electrical
signaling through brain capillaries, in that stimuli below K+
concentrations of 7 mM are ineffective in changing arteriole
diameter, whereas K+ concentrations above this concentration
evoke near-maximal dilation of the upstream arteriole (Longden
et al., 2017). This behavior can be explained from the perspective
of the Kir channel by introducing a bistable membrane potential
with points of stability at EK when channels are fully active
and the resting membrane potential when they are closed
(Moshkforoush et al., 2020). Similarly, the transfer of signals
along lengths of arterial tissue has been studied in detail, and
this work reveals the conduction of electrical signals along the
endothelium which is largely sustained at distances of up to
2 mm, suggesting an active regeneration mechanism (Emerson
and Segal, 2000, 2001), which is readily transferred laterally to
the smooth muscle (Yamamoto et al., 1999).
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 17 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
Figure 5. Electrical signal length constants and resolution of blood flow control. Concepts are depicted for brain vasculature. Similar principles likely
apply in other organs, modified by specific angioarchitectural features and molecular configurations. (A) Brain vasculature. Top: Top-down view showing
overlapping pial (surface) arterial and veinous networks. Bottom: Side-view showing a pial artery transitioning to a penetrating arteriole as it dives into the
brain and gives way to the capillary network. Left inset: Neurovascular unit at the initial capillaries surrounded by contractile pericytes. Right inset:
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 18 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
In other tissues and in other tissue activity scenarios, a form
of analog signaling could predominate. From a biophysical perspective, such signaling would be by its nature non-regenerative
and non-propagative and could instead be organized around the
electrotonic conduction of potentials according to the cable
properties of the local vessels. Possible molecular configurations
that would enable such a signal would be a capillary bed that
receives electrical input via gap junctions from either parenchymal cells or overlying pericytes acting as signal generators,
while at the same time lacking a high density of Kir channels in
the ECs. Without a regenerative mechanism to amplify and
propagate the signal, a voltage change would instead exponentially decay as a function of vessel distance, the degree of
membrane leak, and the size of other “background” conductances. EMS operating in this mode would thus give rise to
signals that are a more direct function of the amplitude and
duration of the initiating metabolic stimulus and would as a
result likely operate over slower and more local time scales and
shape the blood flow response accordingly (Fig. 5).
The incoming blood that results from these dilations initiated
by EMS performs multiple homeostatic functions. In addition to
the delivery of energy substrates and O2, CO2, lactate, and other
waste products generated during metabolic activity are removed
(Fig. 1), and in the process pH and temperature of the tissue may
be regulated also. Accordingly, the increase in metabolic activity
in the tissue is compensated for and deviations in intracellular
energy state (i.e., changes in ATP:ADP ratio) are reversed, effectively matching energy demand to supply and ensuring continued
optimal function of the tissue.
Taken together, the three stages of the EMS hypothesis outlined above provide a mechanistic framework enabling the accurate and timely coupling of energy supply through blood flow
to local metabolic needs in highly active tissues. We postulate
that EMS variants operate in all tissues with high energy consumption (e.g., brain, heart, kidney, skeletal muscle) and likely
also in other areas and that this precise matching helps to ensure
the health and function of local cells on a moment-to-moment
basis across long periods of time.
EMS uncoupling as a mediator of aging
We posit that EMS plays a key role in matching the energetic
demands of varied physiological processes with precise moment-to-moment energy substrate delivery via the blood. It thus
follows that processes that disrupt EMS would be detrimental to
overall tissue function, stemming from an inability to meet
ongoing energetic demands. Aging is one such process that could
degrade EMS and is characterized by a panoply of functional
changes that result in overall organismal decline. A number of
hallmarks of the aging process have been defined and these
include genomic instability, telomere attrition, epigenetic alterations, loss of proteostasis, disabled macroautophagy, deregulation of nutrient sensing, mitochondrial dysfunction, cellular
senescence, stem cell exhaustion, inflammation, dysbiosis, and
alterations to intercellular communication (López-Ot´ın et al.,
2023).
It is possible that age-related alterations to intercellular signaling (for example, due to the loss of cardiac and vascular KATP
channel function that has been documented in older animals
[Yang et al., 2016]) could be a proximate cause that deranges the
metabolic sensing or signal transmission aspects of EMS, which
would then be expected to contribute further to the aging process. It is not difficult to conceive that the reduced substrate
delivery emanating from impaired blood flow regulation due to
loss of EMS could then play into mitochondrial dysfunction and
thus exert an outsized impact on cellular energy status. Indeed,
many of the aging hallmarks outlined above depend on precise
control of energy generation and delivery. For example, altered
substrate availability will affect the activity of the mechanistic
target of the rapamycin (MTOR) complex which modulates the
activity of a range of transcription factors influencing the expression of elements that contribute to a huge number of core
cellular activities, including protein synthesis and proteasome
activity, autophagy, and metabolism (López-Ot´ın et al., 2023).
Accordingly, it seems feasible that age-related declines in EMS
could play a key role in aging through knock-on effects on
mechanisms that are at the heart of the aging process. By preventing EMS degradation over long time spans—for example
through the development of gerotherapies that preserve EMS
sensing, transduction, and propagation mechanisms—it may be
possible to preserve overall tissue and organ function and
slow aging.
EMS uncoupling as a driver of organ failure states
Our hypothesis places EMS at the center of blood flow modulation mechanisms in a range of tissues. Extending from the
foregoing, it follows that disease process-related breakdown of
EMS mechanisms could be an initiating factor in the mismatch
between energy supply and demand which then precipitates
metabolic failure states that compromise organ function and
lead to further pathology.
Organ function is intricately intertwined with metabolism,
and thus pathologies that disrupt metabolic function have wideranging and frequently disastrous effects. Metabolic syndrome
is highly prevalent, and in the US is estimated to affect ∼35% of
Neurovascular unit of the deep capillary bed with thin strand pericytes. EC, endothelial cell; GJ, gap junction; PSJ, peg-socket junction; RBC, red blood cell.
(B) Diameter–voltage relationship for a pial artery showing that maximal working range is controlled across ∼30 mV of membrane potential. Adapted with
permission from Knot and Nelson (1998). (C) Regenerative and passive signal transmission modes. Top: Theoretical signal transmission–distance relationships
for regenerative and passive signals. Regenerative mechanisms will conduct over greater lengths of vessel due to the signal being actively renewed. Bottom:
Graphical depiction of regenerative versus passive transmission modes. (D) The length constant of transmission, dictated by input amplitude and the electrical
properties of the local vasculature, will determine the resolution of blood flow control. Top: Activation of large areas of tissue will initiate large signals in the
vasculature that conduct over longer distances and induce more contractile cells to relax and produce a low-resolution blood flow increase that encompasses
many cells. Middle: Smaller metabolically active fields will evoke electrical signals with a shorter length constant, recruiting fewer vessels and evoking more
localized blood flow increases that perfuse a smaller tissue volume. Bottom: The smallest active regions may evoke a higher resolution blood flow increase still.
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 19 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
the population (Hirode and Wong, 2020). It consists of a group
of conditions that encompasses obesity, hypertension, and dyslipidemia among others which greatly increase the risk of developing diabetes, heart disease, and stroke, and is overall linked
to early death (Eckel et al., 2010). A major factor that promotes
the development of metabolic syndrome is a high-fat diet, and
interestingly, this has been associated with the impairment of a
wide range of elements that comprise the EMS mechanisms we
have identified. Specifically, a high-fat diet has been shown to
impair vascular KATP channel function (Fan et al., 2008, 2009)
and endothelial Kir2.1 function (Fancher et al., 2020; Ahn et al.,
2022), the two key EMS elements involved in the transduction of
metabolic signals to changes in membrane electrical activity and
transmission of electrical signals throughout the vasculature,
respectively. Moreover, vascular smooth muscle undergoes a
range of changes in obesity including an increase in the density
of voltage-gated Ca2+ channels which enhances contraction
(Owen et al., 2013), along with a decrease in BK channel function
(Borbouse et al., 2009), promoting hypertension and a decrease
in blood flow.
Such changes would be expected to weaken EMS by reducing
the ability to generate substantial electrical signals, while also
diminishing their propagation throughout the vasculature.
Weaker signals arriving at the arteriolar level would also encounter a higher basal contractile state, resulting from a higher
level of intracellular Ca2+ at a given membrane potential. This is
predicted to further limit the ability of the arriving hyperpolarization to drive a significant decrease in the level of intracellular Ca2+ to drive dilations and increase blood flow to
metabolically active regions. Accordingly, functional disruption
of EMS could be an early event that compounds issues locally
within the affected tissue driven by insufficient energy substrate delivery. Exploration of these possibilities will reveal the
extent of the contribution of EMS disruption to a range of pathologies in organs throughout the body.
The pancreas plays a central role in energy balance by controlling blood glucose levels through insulin secretion. As blood
glucose levels rise (e.g., postprandially) insulin secretion increases, which promotes glucose utilization, uptake, and storage.
Efficient microvascular function and tight control of blood flow
are accordingly essential to pancreatic function, and impairment
of pericyte and capillary signaling as well as structural microvascular abnormalities are early events in the pathogenesis of
diabetes. As such, the loss of blood flow control in pancreatic
islets could be a key event that impacts nutrient sensing, hormone release, and the timely control of glycemic status (Almaça
et al, 2018; Gonçalves et al, 2023). The resulting derangements in
insulin signaling and blood glucose levels in turn will have a
range of further effects that could compromise efficient energy
matching to local metabolic demands and contribute to multiorgan functional decline.
Heart failure is associated with metabolic changes that lead to
loss of efficient energy generation that contributes to profound
impairment of cardiac output. Accordingly, blood flow is disrupted throughout the body, further compounding any existing
energetic issues and creating novel problems associated with a
lack of proper substrate delivery. Due to these far-reaching
ramifications, heart failure is perceived as a complex, multiorgan syndrome with metabolic failure as the central driving
force (Rosano and Vitale, 2018). Under normal circumstances,
the heart predominantly oxidizes free fatty acids but also uses
glucose to produce the ATP needed for optimal function. In heart
failure, insulin resistance is thought to limit glucose utilization
and favor the use of free fatty acids for ketogenesis. This leads to
a reduction in the production of ATP in the heart, which in turn
contributes to a decline in the efficiency of cardiac output. This
is interwoven with other abnormal processes such as structural
changes and an increase in oxidative stress (Rosano and Vitale,
2018). After the onset of cardiac failure, activation of the sympathetic nervous system and renin–angiotensin system may also
trigger an increase in cytokines, angiotensin II, and free fatty
acids. The latter damages the pancreas, impairing insulin regulation of blood glucose and disrupting glucose handling by
skeletal muscle. The elevated angiotensin II can also drive
vasoconstriction—further impairing blood delivery—and hampered endothelial function has been noted in this context
(Ashrafian et al., 2007; Giannitsi et al., 2019). Activation of the
angiotensin AT1 receptor also produces ROS in the vessel wall
which could contribute to signaling processes under normal
conditions but may disrupt components of local EMS mechanisms when out of balance with antioxidants (Nickenig and
Harrison, 2002). Against this backdrop, impairment of EMS
may contribute to disturbed metabolic activity in the heart and
therefore the reduction of cardiac output and its downstream
effects. For example, disruption of KATP-mediated electrical
signaling from cardiac myocytes to ECs (Zhao et al., 2020a)
would be predicted to impair the tight matching of blood flow to
energy demand and therefore contribute to cardiac dysfunction.
Further work is needed to explore this possibility and the potential disruption of other aspects of EMS in the context of heart
disease.
Disruption of cerebral blood flow is thought to be one of the
earliest factors on the path to dementia, in some cases being
detectable decades before the onset of cognitive decline (IturriaMedina et al., 2016). This has been suggested as a watershed
moment that leads to a range of compounding consequences that
ultimately lead to neuronal dysfunction, death, and cognitive
decline. Indeed, it has been postulated that once a critical
threshold of cerebral hypoperfusion has been crossed, a panoply
of cellular issues ensue throughout the neurovascular unit
stemming from this disrupted energy balance (de la Torre,
2000a). These include the degeneration of pericytes (Sagare
et al., 2013; Halliday et al., 2016) and profound alterations to
endothelial (Wang et al., 2018) and smooth muscle cells
(Chabriat et al., 2009), leading, in turn, to further hemodynamic
impairments, increased generation of free radicals by starved
mitochondria, damage of cellular macromolecules, loss of control over membrane potential and ionic imbalance due to Na+/K+
ATPase dysfunction, derangements in Ca2+ handling, impacts on
gene expression, and impaired protein production, posttranslational modification, and trafficking (de la Torre, 2000b). Together, these mounting problems initially cause neuronal
dysfunction and lead ultimately to the death of the cell. As EMS
provides an essential link matching blood flow to neuronal
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 20 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
metabolic needs, subtle functional disturbances in this process
could divorce capillary electrical signaling from local metabolism and thus lead to mismatching between neuronal energy
supply and demand, driving the advancement of the cascade of
issues outlined above. Importantly, such disruptions could be
initiated in the brain capillaries themselves or could arise as the
result of dysfunction in other organs (e.g., pancreas and heart)
leading to inefficiencies in energy substrate supply that disrupt
brain metabolism. Studies taking an integrated multiorgan view
of the cascading effects that result from blood flow impairment
throughout the body are thus essential to explore the impacts of
energy substrate delivery impairment on integrated physiological functioning.
Outstanding questions and future directions
Our recent studies have revealed overlapping yet distinct EMS
mechanisms that operate in both the brain (Hariharan et al.,
2022; Longden et al., 2023) and heart (Zhao et al., 2020a;
Longden et al., 2023). Work in these systems offers a platform to
deepen our understanding EMS in these and other organs, and
here we outline the key outstanding questions at the present
juncture and the technological developments that will be necessary to gain a full understanding of this system and its contributions to health and disease.
Key questions to unlock a deeper understanding of EMS
What is the full range of organ systems that utilize EMS to
match blood flow to cellular metabolic demands? As noted above,
our work has revealed EMS mechanisms in the brain and heart,
but other organs with high energy demands remain unexplored.
Of particular note, the kidneys rank alongside the heart as the
joint-top organs with the highest resting energy expenditure
(Wang et al., 2010). The brain consumes around half as much
ATP “at rest,” followed closely by the liver, with skeletal muscle
and adipose tissue trailing these and accounting for only a small
fraction of basal metabolic rate. Of course, both individual brain
regions and skeletal muscles engage in dramatic changes in their
activity levels (i.e., when engaging in computations or contractions, respectively). Accordingly, it is important to investigate in detail the different types of EMS mechanisms operating
in these tissues and beyond, where variations and modifications
may provide insight into local metabolic regulation. For example, it is possible that EMS is absent in a tissue like the liver,
which maintains a large store of glycogen to draw upon to meet
its energy needs when glucose levels in the blood are low (Rui,
2014). In the kidney, the glomerular filtration rate is homeostatically controlled and is influenced by blood flow, increases in
which drive filtration, greater reabsorption, and increased
metabolic demands. Investigating whether other EMS mechanisms are at play in the kidney at the capillary and arteriolar
levels may yield further useful insights. By extension, surveying
the operation of EMS and its, similarities, differences, and
ramifications throughout all organs are important avenues for
future work.
What is the full range of metabolic triggers of EMS? Current
data suggest important roles for intracellular energy state
(i.e., ATP:ADP ratio) resulting from increased work and
decreased local energy substrate availability as triggering factors
in EMS. Moving forward, it will be important to determine the
full range of factors produced in response to metabolic deviations in eliciting electrical signaling through the vasculature and
their detailed mechanisms. For example, investigating the relationship between lactate and capillary electrical signaling is an
important and tractable set of experiments that is within easy
reach. Measurements of O2 tension in vivo are more difficult but
have been made possible by the development of elegant phosphorescent lifetime imaging approaches (Sakadzic et al., 2010 ´ ).
Improvements in the time resolution of these measurements
and their wider application will offer deeper insights into the
relationship between local O2 fluctuations and blood flow. Given
the huge complexity of biochemical pathways, the number of
potential factors that could engage EMS is vast, and mechanisms
could be tailored to elicit electrical responses from metabolic
processes that produce a wide array of metabolites and byproducts. Efforts to understand the breadth of these metabolic
signaling mechanisms and the specific mechanisms through
which they produce electrical signaling in the vasculature will
thus reveal insights into EMS in a range of contexts.
What is the full range of mechanisms that convert metabolic
load to blood flow elevations at the arteriolar and capillary
levels? Here, we have considered EMS mechanisms primarily
from the standpoint of propagated hyperpolarizations from
capillaries to arterioles. As discussed above, different mechanisms underlying these signals may be tailored to suit the particular blood flow needs of a given tissue. For example, the
kidney requires constant blood flow to enable optimal filtration,
and thus feedback mechanisms to maintain blood flow at a homeostatic set-point may dominate in this organ. In contrast,
heart, brain, and skeletal muscle all exhibit rapid changes in
activity and metabolism across various spatiotemporal domains
and thus the EMS mechanisms that have evolved are likely to be
specialized to meet their individual blood flow requirements.
Although in general arteriole coverage is sparser than the
reach of the capillary bed, it will be important alongside work in
capillaries to understand the EMS mechanisms operating directly in arterioles at the levels of the arteriolar endothelium and
in SMCs, which may have unique mechanisms to sense local
metabolic changes.
How does EMS breakdown contribute to aging and disease? Given
the suspected widespread nature of EMS signaling, the potential
for contribution to aging and to a range of disease processes is
extensive. Aging is characterized by a general decline in function during adulthood. Given the essential need of all organ
systems to match metabolic needs with energy delivery through
tightly controlled blood flow, it is possible that disruption of
EMS makes a key contribution to the aging process. Here, a
decline in the efficiency of EMS mechanisms could lead to a
gradually widening gap between energy demand and delivery,
which in turn is expected to influence essentially all aspects of
cellular health. Extending this to disease processes, contexts for
EMS disruption that are of particular interest are disorders involving a metabolic component such as diabetes, metabolic
syndrome, Alzheimer’s disease, and vascular dementia, and
also rarer inherited metabolic diseases such as Niemann-Pick
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 21 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
disease, Tay-Sachs disease, or porphyria. Accordingly, understanding how EMS contributes to both aging and disease and
finding ways to restore or boost flagging EMS mechanisms may
help to extend the health span of aging individuals and may offer
novel approaches to treat diseases of metabolism that impact a
wide range of organ systems.
Technological developments to enable breakthroughs in
understanding EMS
To enable deeper insight into the organization and operation of
EMS mechanisms described above, key technological developments
are needed that will expand sensing capabilities and augment the
resolution of imaging approaches. Together, these will allow us to
measure EMS in increasingly complex and holistic scenarios.
Development of approaches to directly visualize EMS in tissue
volumes. At present, multiphoton imaging methods are best
suited to imaging hemodynamics and EMS processes occurring
deep within tissues. However, several technical hurdles make
visualization of EMS processes challenging. In particular, standard multiphoton systems are typically restricted to time-lapse
imaging of single planes at video rate using resonant and galvanometer scanning mirrors to guide rapid laser rastering or
acquisition of small volumes at a few hertz using piezoelectric
objective drives. To be able to fully understand EMS, advances
enabling video rate imaging of electrical signaling in large tissue
volumes are required, thus capturing the dynamics occurring
in highly convoluted vascular networks. A number of recent
technical achievements in multiphoton imaging make it feasible
to overcome these issues in the near future. In particular, the
development of FACED microscopy and its extension to blood
flow imaging enables kilohertz imaging of single planes and
megahertz imaging of single lines. These approaches are fast
enough to capture the dynamics of even the fastest moving RBCs
moving through the largest arteries and enable for the first time
the precise measurement of blood flow (i.e., RBC flux and velocity) without the need to completely collapse the spatial dimension to a single line. The application of Bessel-focused beams
has enabled the rapid imaging of considerably larger volumes
than were previously accessible (Fan et al., 2020a), and the
development of SCAPE imaging has also enabled high-speed
dynamic volumetric imaging in vivo (Bouchard et al., 2015;
Voleti et al., 2019). The widespread adoption of these exciting
techniques will enable a more detailed understanding of the
vascular dynamics of various organ systems, and the volume of
data these approaches generate will necessarily spur the development of further automated techniques for analysis.
Accompanying these hardware developments is the need to
develop novel models to enable direct visualization of the EMS
process. Thus, the generation of mouse lines that express stateof-the-art voltage sensors such as ASAP (Evans et al., 2023) or
opto-patch (Fan et al., 2020b) variants in pericytes, ECs, and
SMCs to enable direct visualization of electrical signaling occurring throughout the vasculature of an organism are essential.
These approaches can be combined with other mouse lines and
viral transfection approaches to enable the visualization of local
activity, metabolic processes, and measurements in the vasculature (Zhao et al., 2020b) throughout tissues of interest.
Approaches to visualize the activity of energy substrate availability and metabolic pathway activity in real time. Until recently,
few options have existed to visualize metabolic processes directly, and available techniques required combined measurements from many cells to obtain low temporal resolution
readouts. However, in recent years advances in probe development now promise great insights into metabolic imaging in vivo,
in real time, and with single-cell resolution. Indeed, a range of
recently developed substrate, metabolite, and energy status
sensors are poised to enable visualization of cell metabolism in
unprecedented detail. For example, the recently developed glucose sensor, green glifon (Mita et al., 2019), has an excellent
spatiotemporal resolution, allowing the real-time measurement
of glucose uptake in single cells. Combination of this with viral
vectors that allow for specific expression in cells of interest will
enable real-time monitoring of glucose availability and uptake
during various scenarios (e.g., brain region activation or increased heart contraction). Alongside this glucose sensor, fluorescent protein-based probes for lactate and pyruvate have also
been developed (Harada et al., 2020), and thus their deployment
in various cell types should allow the visualization of glycolytic
flux and the flow of lactate produced during metabolism. The
development of phosphorescent probes with lifetimes that are
sensitive to the local concentration of O2 is also now enabling the
visualization of vessel and tissue oxygenation. These studies are
updating traditional models of O2 diffusion into the tissue such
as the Krogh cylinder by providing novel insights into the dynamics of O2 consumption in working tissue. Improvements in
the spatiotemporal resolution of these imaging techniques and
their deployment in in vivo studies throughout the body will add
layers of detail to our understanding of O2 delivery and utilization (Sakadzic et al., 2010 ´ ; Parpaleix et al., 2013; Lyons et al.,
2016; Aydin et al., 2022).
Operating at the opposite end of the spectrum of substrate
consumption is PercevalHR, a probe for intracellular energy
status. This allows real-time measurement of ATP:ADP ratio and
has been deployed in neurons during activation with glucose,
KCl, or electrical stimulation and provides excellent resolution
revealing how these stimuli alter the ratio of high energy molecules within the cell (Tantama et al., 2013). Notably, several of
these probes are two-photon compatible and so should be deployable in vivo to allow the observation of how these different
aspects of metabolism intersect with one another in a systems
context. Ongoing developments in the field of redox biology,
such as the development of the novel redox probe FROG/B
(Sugiura et al., 2020), also promise to overcome the limitations
of current probes which makes their direct application and interpretation in vivo challenging. Further work to produce
imaging tools with superior signal-to-noise ratio and tailored
subcellular localization in organelles will undoubtedly yield
deeper insights into this exciting area for further development.
Visualization of the nanoscale organization of EMS complexes. A
further priority is determining the specific molecular organization of the signaling components that enable EMS in different
cell types and systems. Considering KATP channels as the central
node of currently known EMS pathways, further work is needed
to establish the specific membrane localization of these channels
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 22 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
in different cells and to elucidate the specific macromolecular
signaling complexes that they occupy. In brain pericytes, for
example, important questions to answer in the near future are
whether the KATP channels are primarily found in the cell body
or in thin-strand processes, or whether they are evenly distributed throughout the plasma membrane. Insights into the
molecular partners with which these channels most closely associate, be that the enzymes of the glycolytic machinery (DharChowdhury et al., 2005), PKA, and A-kinase anchoring proteins
(Hayabuchi et al., 2001), or as yet undetermined signaling
partners, will help in the determination of the precise intracellular mechanisms through which these channels are engaged.
An appealing possibility in this context is that the KATP channel
could occupy a macromolecular signaling complex positioned in
or very close to peg-socket junctions between pericytes and
endothelial cells (Ornelas et al., 2021), permitting the immediate transfer of charge generated by KATP channels into the
underlying endothelium for optimal electrical signaling upstream to arterioles. Further technical developments are
needed to probe EMS at this level of detail, but answering
nanoscale questions will offer insight that likely will be essential for understanding how EMS falters in aging and disease and will be needed for finding potential solutions to
rectifying such issues.
Summary and conclusions
In summary, we outline a hypothesis for EMS as a generalized
blood flow control mechanism operating across tissues with a
wide range of spatiotemporal energy needs. Specifically, EMS
can be initiated by a range of metabolic changes, including those
of substrate availability, altered intracellular energy status, and
byproducts of metabolism. Through the activity of K+ channels
and KATP channels in particular, metabolic cues are converted
into electrical signals in the vasculature which are then conducted along the capillary and arteriolar endothelium to produce
relaxation of upstream SMCs and contractile pericytes and increase blood flow to areas of metabolic need. It is possible that
disruption of EMS in aging and in disease states with metabolic
and vascular components is a key event that leads to a mismatch
between energy supply and demand and participates actively
in the development of cellular dysfunction and nominally irreversible tissue damage. Accordingly, targeting EMS for the
development of novel therapeutics may provide the means to
protect blood flow and energy delivery to tissues, thereby
counteracting the metabolic deficits that arise during aging
(Amorim et al., 2022), and helping to restore energy balance
in diseases ranging from Alzheimer’s and dementia to diabetes, metabolic syndrome, heart failure, and chronic kidney
disease.
As such, research aimed at fully elucidating the physiological
mechanisms of EMS and visualizing its contributions to blood
flow control in complex three-dimensional time-resolved networks is essential. Equally important are investigations of mechanisms by which the EMS may be damaged during aging and
disease. Likewise, therapeutic repair or restoration of damaged
EMS components to ameliorate or fix this damage may provide
partial or complete repair in diverse degenerative diseases.
Acknowledgments
David A. Eisner served as editor.
Support for this work was provided to T.A. Longden by the
National Institutes of Health National Institutes on Aging
(1R01AG066645) and Neurological Disorders and Stroke,
(5R01NS115401, and 1DP2NS121347) and by the American Heart
Association (19IPLOI34660108) and to. W.J. Lederer by the National Institutes of Heart, Lung and Blood (R01 HL142290), Allergy and Infectious Diseases (U19 AI090959), General Medical
Sciences (GM140822), and by special funds from BioMET at the
University of Maryland School of Medicine.
Author contributions: All authors reviewed the manuscript
and approved its submission.
Disclosures: The authors declare no competing interests exist.
Submitted: 26 July 2023
Revised: 27 October 2023
Accepted: 14 December 2023
References
Abd El-Rahman, R.R., O.F. Harraz, S.E. Brett, Y. Anfinogenova, R.E. Mufti, D.
Goldman, and D.G. Welsh. 2013. Identification of L- and T-type Ca2+
channels in rat cerebral arteries: Role in myogenic tone development.
Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol. 304:H58–H71. https://doi.org/10.1152/
ajpheart.00476.2012
Aguilar-Bryan, L., and J. Bryan. 1999. Molecular biology of adenosine
triphosphate-sensitive potassium channels. Endocr. Rev. 20:101–135.
https://doi.org/10.1210/edrv.20.2.0361
Ahn, S.J., I.S. Fancher, J.T. Bian, C.X. Zhang, S. Schwab, R. Gaffin, S.A. Phillips, and I. Levitan. 2017. Inwardly rectifying K+ channels are major
contributors to flow-induced vasodilatation in resistance arteries.
J. Physiol. 595:2339–2364. https://doi.org/10.1113/JP273255
Ahn, S.J., E. Le Master, J.C. Lee, S.A. Phillips, I. Levitan, and I.S. Fancher.
2022. Differential effects of obesity on visceral versus subcutaneous
adipose arteries: Role of shear-activated Kir2.1 and alterations to the
glycocalyx. Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol. 322:H156–H166. https://doi
.org/10.1152/ajpheart.00399.2021
Airan, R.D., K.R. Thompson, L.E. Fenno, H. Bernstein, and K. Deisseroth.
2009. Temporally precise in vivo control of intracellular signalling.
Nature. 458:1025–1029. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature07926
Alarcon-Martinez, L., S. Yilmaz-Ozcan, M. Yemisci, J. Schallek, K. Kılıç, A.
Can, A. Di Polo, and T. Dalkara. 2018. Capillary pericytes express
α-smooth muscle actin, which requires prevention of filamentous-actin
depolymerization for detection. Elife. 7:e34861. https://doi.org/10.7554/
eLife.34861
Allen, P.S., G.O. Matheson, G. Zhu, D. Gheorgiu, R.S. Dunlop, T. Falconer, C.
Stanley, and P.W. Hochachka. 1997. Simultaneous 31P MRS of the soleus
and gastrocnemius in Sherpas during graded calf muscle exercise. Am.
J. Physiol. 273:R999–R1007. https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpregu.1997.273.3.R999
Almaça, J., J. Weitz, R. Rodriguez-Diaz, E. Pereira, and A. Caicedo. 2018. The
pericyte of the pancreatic islet regulates capillary diameter and local
blood flow. Cell Metab. 27:630–644.e4. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cmet
.2018.02.016
Alsahli, M., and J.E. Gerich. 2017. Renal glucose metabolism in normal
physiological conditions and in diabetes. Diabetes Res. Clin. Pract. 133:
1–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.diabres.2017.07.033
Amorim, J.A., G. Coppotelli, A.P. Rolo, C.M. Palmeira, J.M. Ross, and D.A.
Sinclair. 2022. Mitochondrial and metabolic dysfunction in ageing and
age-related diseases. Nat. Rev. Endocrinol. 18:243–258. https://doi.org/10
.1038/s41574-021-00626-7
Anderson, B.G., and W.D. Anderson. 1980. Microvasculature of the canine
heart demonstrated by scanning electron microscopy. Am. J. Anat. 158:
217–227. https://doi.org/10.1002/aja.1001580210
Arnold, P.K., and L.W.S. Finley. 2023. Regulation and function of the mammalian tricarboxylic acid cycle. J. Biol. Chem. 299:102838. https://doi
.org/10.1016/j.jbc.2022.102838
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 23 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
Ashrafian, H., M.P. Frenneaux, and L.H. Opie. 2007. Metabolic mechanisms
in heart failure. Circulation. 116:434–448. https://doi.org/10.1161/
CIRCULATIONAHA.107.702795
Aydin, A.-K., C. Verdier, E. Chaigneau, and S. Charpak. 2022. The oxygen
initial dip in the brain of anesthetized and awake mice. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. USA. 119:e2200205119. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2200205119
Aziz, Q., Y. Li, N. Anderson, L. Ojake, E. Tsisanova, and A. Tinker. 2017.
Molecular and functional characterization of the endothelial ATPsensitive potassium channel. J. Biol. Chem. 292:17587–17597. https://doi
.org/10.1074/jbc.M117.810325
Babenko, A.P., and J. Bryan. 2003. Sur domains that associate with and gate
KATP pores define a novel gatekeeper. J. Biol. Chem. 278:41577–41580.
https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.C300363200
Bagher, P., T. Beleznai, Y. Kansui, R. Mitchell, C.J. Garland, and K.A. Dora.
2012. Low intravascular pressure activates endothelial cell TRPV4
channels, local Ca2+ events, and IKCa channels, reducing arteriolar tone.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 109:18174–18179. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas
.1211946109
Baker, J.S., M.C. McCormick, and R.A. Robergs. 2010. Interaction among
skeletal muscle metabolic energy systems during intense exercise.
J. Nutr. Metab. 2010:905612. https://doi.org/10.1155/2010/905612
Balaban, R.S., H.L. Kantor, L.A. Katz, and R.W. Briggs. 1986. Relation between
work and phosphate metabolite in the in vivo paced mammalian heart.
Science. 232:1121–1123. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.3704638
Ballanyi, K. 2004. Protective role of neuronal KATP channels in brain hypoxia. J. Exp. Biol. 207:3201–3212. https://doi.org/10.1242/jeb.01106
Ballanyi, K., J. Doutheil, and J. Brockhaus. 1996. Membrane potentials and
microenvironment of rat dorsal vagal cells in vitro during energy depletion. J. Physiol. 495:769–784. https://doi.org/10.1113/jphysiol.1996
.sp021632
Baukrowitz, T., U. Schulte, D. Oliver, S. Herlitze, T. Krauter, S.J. Tucker, J.P.
Ruppersberg, and B. Fakler. 1998. PIP2 and PIP as determinants for ATP
inhibition of KATP channels. Science. 282:1141–1144. https://doi.org/10
.1126/science.282.5391.1141
Beach, J.M., E.D. McGahren, and B.R. Duling. 1998. Capillaries and arterioles
are electrically coupled in hamster cheek pouch. Am. J. Physiol. 275:
H1489–H1496. https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpheart.1998.275.4.H1489
Beech, D.J., H. Zhang, K. Nakao, and T.B. Bolton. 1993. K channel activation by
nucleotide diphosphates and its inhibition by glibenclamide in vascular
smooth muscle cells. Br. J. Pharmacol. 110:573–582. https://doi.org/10
.1111/j.1476-5381.1993.tb13849.x
Berthiaume, A.A., R.I. Grant, K.P. McDowell, R.G. Underly, D.A. Hartmann,
M. Levy, N.R. Bhat, and A.Y. Shih. 2018. Dynamic remodeling of pericytes in vivo maintains capillary coverage in the adult mouse brain. Cell
Rep. 22:8–16. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2017.12.016
Bhargava, P., and R.G. Schnellmann. 2017. Mitochondrial energetics in the
kidney. Nat. Rev. Nephrol. 13:629–646. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrneph
.2017.107
Blinder, P., P.S. Tsai, J.P. Kaufhold, P.M. Knutsen, H. Suhl, and D. Kleinfeld.
2013. The cortical angiome: An interconnected vascular network with
noncolumnar patterns of blood flow. Nat. Neurosci. 16:889–897. https://
doi.org/10.1038/nn.3426
Bonev, A.D., and M.T. Nelson. 1996. Vasoconstrictors inhibit ATP-sensitive K+
channels in arterial smooth muscle through protein kinase C. J. Gen.
Physiol. 108:315–323. https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.108.4.315
Bonora, M., S. Patergnani, A. Rimessi, E. De Marchi, J.M. Suski, A. Bononi, C.
Giorgi, S. Marchi, S. Missiroli, F. Poletti, et al. 2012. ATP synthesis and
storage. Purinergic Signal. 8:343–357. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11302-012
-9305-8
Borbouse, L., G.M. Dick, S. Asano, S.B. Bender, U.D. Dincer, G.A. Payne, Z.P.
Neeb, I.N. Bratz, M. Sturek, and J.D. Tune. 2009. Impaired function of
coronary BK(Ca) channels in metabolic syndrome. Am. J. Physiol. Heart
Circ. Physiol. 297:H1629–H1637. https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpheart.00466
.2009
Bouchard, M.B., V. Voleti, C.S. Mendes, C. Lacefield, W.B. Grueber, R.S.
Mann, R.M. Bruno, and E.M.C. Hillman. 2015. Swept confocally-aligned
planar excitation (SCAPE) microscopy for high speed volumetric
imaging of behaving organisms. Nat. Photonics. 9:113–119. https://doi
.org/10.1038/nphoton.2014.323
Brayden, J.E., and M.T. Nelson. 1992. Regulation of arterial tone by activation
of calcium-dependent potassium channels. Science. 256:532–535. https://
doi.org/10.1126/science.1373909
Buttgereit, F., and M.D. Brand. 1995. A hierarchy of ATP-consuming processes in mammalian cells. Biochem. J. 312:163–167. https://doi.org/10
.1042/bj3120163
Buxton, R.B. 2001. The elusive initial dip. Neuroimage. 13:953–958. https://doi
.org/10.1006/nimg.2001.0814
Bychkov, R., K. Pieper, C. Ried, M. Milosheva, E. Bychkov, F.C. Luft, and H.
Haller. 1999. Hydrogen peroxide, potassium currents, and membrane
potential in human endothelial cells. Circulation. 99:1719–1725. https://
doi.org/10.1161/01.CIR.99.13.1719
Chabriat, H., A. Joutel, M. Dichgans, E. Tournier-Lasserve, and M.-G. Bousser.
2009. Cadasil. Lancet Neurol. 8:643–653. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1474
-4422(09)70127-9
Chai, Y., and Y.-F. Lin. 2010. Stimulation of neuronal KATP channels by
cGMP-dependent protein kinase: Involvement of ROS and 5-hydroxydecanoate-sensitive factors in signal transduction. Am. J. Physiol. Cell
Physiol. 298:C875–C892. https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpcell.00196.2009
Chai, Y., D.-M. Zhang, and Y.-F. Lin. 2011. Activation of cGMP-dependent
protein kinase stimulates cardiac ATP-sensitive potassium channels
via a ROS/calmodulin/CaMKII signaling cascade. PLoS One. 6:e18191.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0018191
Chapman, C.L., Z.J. Schlader, E.L. Reed, M.L. Worley, and B.D. Johnson. 2020.
Renal and segmental artery hemodynamic response to acute, mild hypercapnia. Am. J. Physiol. Regul. Integr. Comp. Physiol. 318:R822–R827.
https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpregu.00035.2020
Charter, M.E., I.R. Lamb, and C.L. Murrant. 2018. Arteriolar and capillary
responses to CO2 and H+ in hamster skeletal muscle microvasculature:
Implications for active hyperemia. Microcirculation. 25:e12494. https://
doi.org/10.1111/micc.12494
Checa, J., and J.M. Aran. 2020. Reactive oxygen species: Drivers of physiological and pathological processes. J. Inflamm. Res. 13:1057–1073. https://
doi.org/10.2147/JIR.S275595
Cheng, Y. 2015. Single-particle cryo-EM at crystallographic resolution. Cell.
161:450–457. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2015.03.049
Cheng, Y., N. Grigorieff, P.A. Penczek, and T. Walz. 2015. A primer to singleparticle cryo-electron microscopy. Cell. 161:438–449. https://doi.org/10
.1016/j.cell.2015.03.050
Choi, I.Y., and R. Gruetter. 2003. In vivo 13C NMR assessment of brain glycogen concentration and turnover in the awake rat. Neurochem. Int. 43:
317–322. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0197-0186(03)00018-4
Chuquet, J., P. Quilichini, E.A. Nimchinsky, and G. Buzsaki. 2010. Predomi- ´
nant enhancement of glucose uptake in astrocytes versus neurons
during activation of the somatosensory cortex. J. Neurosci. 30:
15298–15303. https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0762-10.2010
Chutkow, W.A., J.C. Makielski, D.J. Nelson, C.F. Burant, and Z. Fan. 1999.
Alternative splicing of sur2 Exon 17 regulates nucleotide sensitivity of
the ATP-sensitive potassium channel. J. Biol. Chem. 274:13656–13665.
https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.274.19.13656
Cleary, C.M., T.S. Moreira, A.C. Takakura, M.T. Nelson, T.A. Longden, and
D.K. Mulkey. 2020. Vascular control of the CO2/H+-dependent drive to
breathe. Elife. 9:e59499. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.59499
Clement, J.P. IV, K. Kunjilwar, G. Gonzalez, M. Schwanstecher, U. Panten, L.
Aguilar-Bryan, and J. Bryan. 1997. Association and stoichiometry of
K(ATP) channel subunits. Neuron. 18:827–838. https://doi.org/10.1016/
S0896-6273(00)80321-9
Conti, L.R., C.M. Radeke, and C.A. Vandenberg. 2002. Membrane targeting of
ATP-sensitive potassium channel. Effects of glycosylation on surface
expression. J. Biol. Chem. 277:25416–25422. https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc
.M203109200
Cook, D.L., and C.N. Hales. 1984. Intracellular ATP directly blocks K+ channels
in pancreatic B-cells. Nature. 311:271–273. https://doi.org/10.1038/
311271a0
Crouch, E.E., A. Bhaduri, M.G. Andrews, A. Cebrian-Silla, L.N. Diafos, J.O.
Birrueta, K. Wedderburn-Pugh, E.J. Valenzuela, N.K. Bennett, U.C. Eze,
et al. 2022. Ensembles of endothelial and mural cells promote angiogenesis in prenatal human brain. Cell. 185:3753–3769.e18. https://doi
.org/10.1016/j.cell.2022.09.004
Dabertrand, F., M.T. Nelson, and J.E. Brayden. 2012. Acidosis dilates brain
parenchymal arterioles by conversion of calcium waves to sparks to
activate BK channels. Circ. Res. 110:285–294. https://doi.org/10.1161/
CIRCRESAHA.111.258145
Dabertrand, F., R.M. Hannah, J.M. Pearson, D.C. Hill-Eubanks, J.E. Brayden,
and M.T. Nelson. 2013. Prostaglandin E2, a postulated astrocyte-derived
neurovascular coupling agent, constricts rather than dilates parenchymal arterioles. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 33:479–482. https://doi
.org/10.1038/jcbfm.2013.9
Dantzler, H.A., M.P. Matott, D. Martinez, and D.D. Kline. 2019. Hydrogen
peroxide inhibits neurons in the paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus via potassium channel activation. Am. J. Physiol. Regul. Integr.
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 24 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
Comp. Physiol. 317:R121–R133. https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpregu.00054
.2019
Daut, J., N.B. Standen, and M.T. Nelson. 1994. The role of the membrane
potential of endothelial and smooth muscle cells in the regulation of
coronary blood flow. J. Cardiovasc. Electrophysiol. 5:154–181. https://doi
.org/10.1111/j.1540-8167.1994.tb01156.x
Davies, L.M., G.I. Purves, R. Barrett-Jolley, and C. Dart. 2010. Interaction with
caveolin-1 modulates vascular ATP-sensitive potassium (KATP) channel
activity. J. Physiol. 588:3255–3266. https://doi.org/10.1113/jphysiol.2010
.194779
de la Torre, J.C. 2000a. Cerebral hypoperfusion, capillary degeneration, and
development of Alzheimer disease. Alzheimer Dis. Assoc. Disord. 14:
S72–S81. https://doi.org/10.1097/00002093-200000001-00012
de la Torre, J.C. 2000b. Critically attained threshold of cerebral hypoperfusion: Can it cause Alzheimer’s disease? Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 903:
424–436. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1749-6632.2000.tb06394.x
de Matthaeis, A., A. Greco, M.P. Dagostino, G. Paroni, A. Fontana, M. Vinciguerra, G. Mazzoccoli, D. Seripa, and G. Vendemiale. 2014. Effects of
hypercapnia on peripheral vascular reactivity in elderly patients with
acute exacerbation of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Clin. Interv. Aging. 9:871–878. https://doi.org/10.2147/CIA.S57548
Deng, D., C. Xu, P. Sun, J. Wu, C. Yan, M. Hu, and N. Yan. 2014. Crystal
structure of the human glucose transporter GLUT1. Nature. 510:121–125.
https://doi.org/10.1038/nature13306
Dhar-Chowdhury, P., M.D. Harrell, S.Y. Han, D. Jankowska, L. Parachuru, A.
Morrissey, S. Srivastava, W. Liu, B. Malester, H. Yoshida, and W.A.
Coetzee. 2005. The glycolytic enzymes, glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate
dehydrogenase, triose-phosphate isomerase, and pyruvate kinase are
components of the K(ATP) channel macromolecular complex and regulate its function. J. Biol. Chem. 280:38464–38470. https://doi.org/10
.1074/jbc.M508744200
Dienel, G.A. 2012. Brain lactate metabolism: The discoveries and the controversies. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 32:1107–1138. https://doi.org/10
.1038/jcbfm.2011.175
DiNuzzo, M. 2019. How glycogen sustains brain function: A plausible allosteric signaling pathway mediated by glucose phosphates. J. Cereb. Blood
Flow Metab. 39:1452–1459. https://doi.org/10.1177/0271678X19856713
Dora, K.A., M.P. Doyle, and B.R. Duling. 1997. Elevation of intracellular calcium in smooth muscle causes endothelial cell generation of NO in
arterioles. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 94:6529–6534. https://doi.org/10
.1073/pnas.94.12.6529
Dora, K.A., J. Xia, and B.R. Duling. 2003. Endothelial cell signaling during
conducted vasomotor responses. Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol. 285:
H119–H126. https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpheart.00643.2002
Dubinsky, W.P., O. Mayorga-Wark, and S.G. Schultz. 1998. Colocalization of
glycolytic enzyme activity and KATP channels in basolateral membrane
of Necturus enterocytes. Am. J. Physiol. 275:C1653–C1659. https://doi
.org/10.1152/ajpcell.1998.275.6.C1653
Duncker, D.J., and R.J. Bache. 2008. Regulation of coronary blood flow during
exercise. Physiol. Rev. 88:1009–1086. https://doi.org/10.1152/physrev
.00045.2006
Dunn, A.K., A. Devor, A.M. Dale, and D.A. Boas. 2005. Spatial extent of
oxygen metabolism and hemodynamic changes during functional activation of the rat somatosensory cortex. Neuroimage. 27:279–290.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2005.04.024
Earley, S., and J.E. Brayden. 2015. Transient receptor potential channels in
the vasculature. Physiol. Rev. 95:645–690. https://doi.org/10.1152/
physrev.00026.2014
Eckel, R.H., K.G. Alberti, S.M. Grundy, and P.Z. Zimmet. 2010. The metabolic
syndrome. Lancet. 375:181–183. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(09)
61794-3
Edwards, G., K.A. Dora, M.J. Gardener, C.J. Garland, and A.H. Weston. 1998.
K+ is an endothelium-derived hyperpolarizing factor in rat arteries.
Nature. 396:269–272. https://doi.org/10.1038/24388
Emerson, G.G., and S.S. Segal. 2000. Endothelial cell pathway for conduction
of hyperpolarization and vasodilation along hamster feed artery. Circ.
Res. 86:94–100. https://doi.org/10.1161/01.RES.86.1.94
Emerson, G.G., and S.S. Segal. 2001. Electrical activation of endothelium
evokes vasodilation and hyperpolarization along hamster feed arteries.
Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol. 280:H160–H167. https://doi.org/10
.1152/ajpheart.2001.280.1.H160
Evans, S.W., D.-Q. Shi, M. Chavarha, M.H. Plitt, J. Taxidis, B. Madruga, J.L. Fan,
F.-J. Hwang, S.C. van Keulen, C.-M. Suomivuori, et al. 2023. A positively
tuned voltage indicator for extended electrical recordings in the brain.Nat.
Methods. 20:1104–1113. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-023-01913-z
Fan, L.-H., H.-Y. Tian, A.-Q. Ma, Z. Hu, J.-H. Huo, and Y.-X. Cao. 2008. Altered ATP-sensitive potassium channels may underscore obesitytriggered increase in blood pressure. Acta Pharmacol. Sin. 29:1167–1174.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1745-7254.2008.00810.x
Fan, L.-H., H.-Y. Tian, M.-L. Yang, A.-Q. Ma, Z. Hu, X.-J. Bai, and Y.-X. Cao.
2009. High-fat diet may impair K(ATP) channels in vascular smooth
muscle cells. Biomed. Pharmacother. 63:165–170. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.biopha.2008.01.005
Fan, J.L., J.A. Rivera, W. Sun, J. Peterson, H. Haeberle, S. Rubin, and N. Ji.
2020a. High-speed volumetric two-photon fluorescence imaging of
neurovascular dynamics. Nat. Commun. 11:6020. https://doi.org/10
.1038/s41467-020-19851-1
Fan, L.Z., S. Kheifets, U.L. Bohm, H. Wu, K.D. Piatkevich, M.E. Xie, V. Parot, ¨
Y. Ha, K.E. Evans, E.S. Boyden, et al. 2020b. All-Optical electrophysiology reveals the role of lateral inhibition in sensory processing in
cortical layer 1. Cell. 180:521–535.e18. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2020
.01.001
Fancher, I.S., E. Le Master, S.J. Ahn, C. Adamos, J.C. Lee, E. Berdyshev, R.O.
Dull, S.A. Phillips, and I. Levitan. 2020. Impairment of flow-sensitive
inwardly rectifying K+ channels via disruption of glycocalyx mediates
obesity-induced endothelial dysfunction. Arterioscler. Thromb. Vasc. Biol.
40:e240–e255. https://doi.org/10.1161/ATVBAHA.120.314935
Fernandes, C.A.H., D. Zuniga, C. Fagnen, V. Kugler, R. Scala, G. Pehau-Ar- ´
naudet, R. Wagner, D. Perahia, S. Bendahhou, and C. Venien-Bryan. ´
2022. Cryo-electron microscopy unveils unique structural features of
the human Kir2.1 channel. Sci. Adv. 8:eabq8489. https://doi.org/10.1126/
sciadv.abq8489
Fernandez-Klett, F., N. Offenhauser, U. Dirnagl, J. Priller, and U. Lindauer. ´
2010. Pericytes in capillaries are contractile in vivo, but arterioles
mediate functional hyperemia in the mouse brain. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA. 107:22290–22295. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1011321108
Figueroa, X.F., and B.R. Duling. 2009. Gap junctions in the control of vascular
function. Antioxid. Redox Signal. 11:251–266. https://doi.org/10.1089/ars
.2008.2117
Forman, H.J., M. Maiorino, and F. Ursini. 2010. Signaling functions of reactive oxygen species. Biochemistry. 49:835–842. https://doi.org/10.1021/
bi9020378
Forstermann, U. 2010. Nitric oxide and oxidative stress in vascular disease. ¨
Pflugers Arch. 459:923–939. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00424-010-0808-2
Foster, M.N., and W.A. Coetzee. 2016. KATP channels in the cardiovascular
system. Physiol. Rev. 96:177–252. https://doi.org/10.1152/physrev.00003
.2015
Fujita, A., and Y. Kurachi. 2000. Molecular aspects of ATP-sensitive K+
channels in the cardiovascular system and K+ channel openers. Pharmacol. Ther. 85:39–53. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0163-7258(99)00050-9
Garland, C.J., P. Bagher, C. Powell, X. Ye, H.A.L. Lemmey, L. Borysova, and
K.A. Dora. 2017. Voltage-dependent Ca2+ entry into smooth muscle
during contraction promotes endothelium-mediated feedback vasodilation in arterioles. Sci. Signal. 10:eaal3806. https://doi.org/10.1126/
scisignal.aal3806
Garthwaite, J. 2019. NO as a multimodal transmitter in the brain: Discovery
and current status. Br. J. Pharmacol. 176:197–211. https://doi.org/10.1111/
bph.14532
Giannitsi, S., M. Bougiakli, A. Bechlioulis, and K. Naka. 2019. Endothelial
dysfunction and heart failure: A review of the existing bibliography
with emphasis on flow mediated dilation. JRSM Cardiovasc. Dis. 8:
2048004019843047. https://doi.org/10.1177/2048004019843047
Gold, P.E., and D.L. Korol. 2012. Making memories matter. Front. Integr.
Neurosci. 6:116. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnint.2012.00116
Goldberg, I.J., C.M. Trent, and P.C. Schulze. 2012. Lipid metabolism and
toxicity in the heart. Cell Metab. 15:805–812. https://doi.org/10.1016/j
.cmet.2012.04.006
Gonçalves, L.M., M.M. Fahd Qadir, M. Boulina, M. Makhmutova, E. Pereira,
and J. Almaça. 2023. Pericyte dysfunction and impaired vasomotion are
hallmarks of islets during the pathogenesis of type 1 diabetes. Cell Reports. 42:112913. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2023.112913
Gonzales, A.L., Y. Yang, M.N. Sullivan, L. Sanders, F. Dabertrand, D.C. HillEubanks, M.T. Nelson, and S. Earley. 2014. A PLCγ1-dependent, forcesensitive signaling network in the myogenic constriction of cerebral
arteries. Sci. Signal. 7:ra49. https://doi.org/10.1126/scisignal.2004732
Gonzales, A.L., N.R. Klug, A. Moshkforoush, J.C. Lee, F.K. Lee, B. Shui, N.M.
Tsoukias, M.I. Kotlikoff, D. Hill-Eubanks, and M.T. Nelson. 2020.
Contractile pericytes determine the direction of blood flow at capillary
junctions. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 117:27022–27033. https://doi.org/10
.1073/pnas.1922755117
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 25 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
Gordon, G.R.J., H.B. Choi, R.L. Rungta, G.C.R. Ellis-Davies, and B.A. MacVicar.
2008. Brain metabolism dictates the polarity of astrocyte control over
arterioles. Nature. 456:745–749. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature07525
Gould, I.G., P. Tsai, D. Kleinfeld, and A. Linninger. 2017. The capillary bed
offers the largest hemodynamic resistance to the cortical blood
supply. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 37:52–68. https://doi.org/10.1177/
0271678X16671146
Grant, R.I., D.A. Hartmann, R.G. Underly, A.-A. Berthiaume, N.R. Bhat, and
A.Y. Shih. 2019. Organizational hierarchy and structural diversity of
microvascular pericytes in adult mouse cortex. J. Cereb. Blood Flow
Metab. 39:411–425. https://doi.org/10.1177/0271678X17732229
Greiner, J.V., and T. Glonek. 2021. Intracellular ATP concentration and implication for cellular evolution. Biology. 10:1166. https://doi.org/10
.3390/biology10111166
Gribble, F.M., G. Loussouarn, S.J. Tucker, C. Zhao, C.G. Nichols, and F.M.
Ashcroft. 2000. A novel method for measurement of submembrane
ATP concentration. J. Biol. Chem. 275:30046–30049. https://doi.org/10
.1074/jbc.M001010200
Grubb, S., C. Cai, B.O. Hald, L. Khennouf, R.P. Murmu, A.G.K. Jensen, J.
Fordsmann, S. Zambach, and M. Lauritzen. 2020. Precapillary sphincters maintain perfusion in the cerebral cortex. Nat. Commun. 11:395.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-020-14330-z
Haas, T.L., and B.R. Duling. 1997. Morphology favors an endothelial cell
pathway for longitudinal conduction within arterioles. Microvasc. Res.
53:113–120. https://doi.org/10.1006/mvre.1996.1999
Hald, B.O., and D.G. Welsh. 2020. Conceptualizing conduction as a pliant
electrical response: Impact of gap junctions and ion channels. Am.
J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol. 319:H1276–H1289. https://doi.org/10.1152/
ajpheart.00285.2020
Hall, C.N., C. Reynell, B. Gesslein, N.B. Hamilton, A. Mishra, B.A. Sutherland,
F.M. O’Farrell, A.M. Buchan, M. Lauritzen, and D. Attwell. 2014. Capillary pericytes regulate cerebral blood flow in health and disease.
Nature. 508:55–60. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature13165
Halliday, M.R., S.V. Rege, Q. Ma, Z. Zhao, C.A. Miller, E.A. Winkler, and B.V.
Zlokovic. 2016. Accelerated pericyte degeneration and blood-brain
barrier breakdown in apolipoprotein E4 carriers with Alzheimer’s
disease. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 36:216–227. https://doi.org/10.1038/
jcbfm.2015.44
Han, J., I. So, E.Y. Kim, and Y.E. Earm. 1993. ATP-sensitive potassium
channels are modulated by intracellular lactate in rabbit ventricular
myocytes. Pflugers Arch. 425:546–548. https://doi.org/10.1007/
BF00374883
Han, J., N. Kim, E. Kim, W.-K. Ho, and Y.E. Earm. 2001. Modulation of ATPsensitive potassium channels by cGMP-dependent protein kinase in
rabbit ventricular myocytes. J. Biol. Chem. 276:22140–22147. https://doi
.org/10.1074/jbc.M010103200
Hannah, R.M., K.M. Dunn, A.D. Bonev, and M.T. Nelson. 2011. Endothelial
SK(Ca) and IK(Ca) channels regulate brain parenchymal arteriolar diameter and cortical cerebral blood flow. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 31:
1175–1186. https://doi.org/10.1038/jcbfm.2010.214
Harada, K., T. Chihara, Y. Hayasaka, M. Mita, M. Takizawa, K. Ishida, M.
Arai, S. Tsuno, M. Matsumoto, T. Ishihara, et al. 2020. Green fluorescent protein-based lactate and pyruvate indicators suitable for biochemical assays and live cell imaging. Sci. Rep. 10:19562. https://doi.org/
10.1038/s41598-020-76440-4
Hariharan, A., N. Weir, C. Robertson, L. He, C. Betsholtz, and T.A. Longden.
2020. The ion channel and GPCR toolkit of brain capillary pericytes.
Front. Cell. Neurosci. 14:601324. https://doi.org/10.3389/fncel.2020
.601324
Hariharan, A., C.D. Robertson, D.C.G. Garcia, and T.A. Longden. 2022. Brain
capillary pericytes are metabolic sentinels that control blood flow
through a KATP channel-dependent energy switch. Cell Rep. 41:111872.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2022.111872
Harraz, O.F., R.R. Abd El-Rahman, K. Bigdely-Shamloo, S.M. Wilson, S.E.
Brett, M. Romero, A.L. Gonzales, S. Earley, E.J. Vigmond, A. Nygren,
et al. 2014. Ca(V)3.2 channels and the induction of negative feedback in
cerebral arteries. Circ. Res. 115:650–661. https://doi.org/10.1161/
CIRCRESAHA.114.304056
Harraz, O.F., T.A. Longden, F. Dabertrand, D. Hill-Eubanks, and M.T. Nelson.
2018a. Endothelial GqPCR activity controls capillary electrical signaling
and brain blood flow through PIP2 depletion. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA.
115:E3569–E3577. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1800201115
Harraz, O.F., T.A. Longden, D. Hill-Eubanks, and M.T. Nelson. 2018b. PIP2
depletion promotes TRPV4 channel activity in mouse brain capillary
endothelial cells. Elife. 7:e38689. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.38689
Harraz, O.F., D. Hill-Eubanks, and M.T. Nelson. 2020. PIP2: A critical regulator of vascular ion channels hiding in plain sight. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA. 117:20378–20389. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2006737117
Harraz, O.F., N.R. Klug, A.J. Senatore, D.C. Hill-Eubanks, and M.T. Nelson. 2022. Piezo1 is a mechanosensor channel in central nervous
system capillaries. Circ. Res. 130:1531–1546. https://doi.org/10.1161/
CIRCRESAHA.122.320827
Hartmann, D.A., A.-A. Berthiaume, R.I. Grant, S.A. Harrill, T. Koski, T. Tieu,
K.P. McDowell, A.V. Faino, A.L. Kelly, and A.Y. Shih. 2021. Brain capillary pericytes exert a substantial but slow influence on blood flow.
Nat. Neurosci. 24:633–645. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41593-020-00793-2
Harvey, W. 1957. Movement of the Heart and Blood in Animals. Blackwell
Scientific, Oxford, UK.
Hayabuchi, Y., C. Dart, and N.B. Standen. 2001. Evidence for involvement of
A-kinase anchoring protein in activation of rat arterial K(ATP) channels
by protein kinase A. J. Physiol. 536:421–427. https://doi.org/10.1111/j
.1469-7793.2001.0421c.xd
He, Y.Y., S.J. Yu, Y. Cui, and P. Du. 2010. Morphological study on microvasculature of left ventricular wall in infant and adult yaks. Anat. Rec.
293:1519–1526. https://doi.org/10.1002/ar.21201
He, L., M. Vanlandewijck, M.A. Mae, J. Andrae, K. Ando, F. Del Gaudio, K. ¨
Nahar, T. Lebouvier, B. Laviña, L. Gouveia, et al. 2018. Single-cell RNA
sequencing of mouse brain and lung vascular and vessel-associated cell
types. Sci. Data. 5:180160. https://doi.org/10.1038/sdata.2018.160
Hein, T.W., W. Xu, and L. Kuo. 2006. Dilation of retinal arterioles in response
to lactate: Role of nitric oxide, guanylyl cyclase, and ATP-sensitive
potassium channels. Invest. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 47:693–699. https://
doi.org/10.1167/iovs.05-1224
Heintz, A., T. Koch, and A. Deussen. 2005. Intact nitric oxide production is
obligatory for the sustained flow response during hypercapnic acidosis
in guinea pig heart. Cardiovasc. Res. 66:55–63. https://doi.org/10.1016/j
.cardiores.2004.12.001
Hellsten, Y., D. Maclean, G. Radegran, B. Saltin, and J. Bangsbo. 1998. Ade- ˚
nosine concentrations in the interstitium of resting and contracting
human skeletal muscle. Circulation. 98:6–8. https://doi.org/10.1161/01
.CIR.98.1.6
Heppner, T.J., A.D. Bonev, L.F. Santana, and M.T. Nelson. 2002. Alkaline pH
shifts Ca2+ sparks to Ca2+ waves in smooth muscle cells of pressurized
cerebral arteries. Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol. 283:H2169–H2176.
https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpheart.00603.2002
Hibino, H., A. Inanobe, K. Furutani, S. Murakami, I. Findlay, and Y. Kurachi.
2010. Inwardly rectifying potassium channels: Their structure, function, and physiological roles. Physiol. Rev. 90:291–366. https://doi.org/10
.1152/physrev.00021.2009
Hilgemann, D.W., and R. Ball. 1996. Regulation of cardiac Na+,Ca2+ exchange
and KATP potassium channels by PIP2. Science. 273:956–959. https://doi
.org/10.1126/science.273.5277.956
Hill, R.A., L. Tong, P. Yuan, S. Murikinati, S. Gupta, and J. Grutzendler. 2015.
Regional blood flow in the normal and ischemic brain is controlled by
arteriolar smooth muscle cell contractility and not by capillary pericytes. Neuron. 87:95–110. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2015.06.001
Hille, B., E.J. Dickson, M. Kruse, O. Vivas, and B.-C. Suh. 2015. Phosphoinositides regulate ion channels. Biochim. Biophys. Acta. 1851:844–856.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbalip.2014.09.010
Hirode, G., and R.J. Wong. 2020. Trends in the prevalence of metabolic
syndrome in the United States, 2011–2016. JAMA. 323:2526–2528.
https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2020.4501
Ho, T., E. Potapenko, D.B. Davis, and M.J. Merrins. 2023. A plasma
membrane-associated glycolytic metabolon is functionally coupled to
KATP channels in pancreatic α and β cells from humans and mice. Cell
Rep. 42:112394. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2023.112394
Hong, M., E. Kefaloyianni, L. Bao, B. Malester, D. Delaroche, T.A. Neubert,
and W.A. Coetzee. 2011. Cardiac ATP-sensitive K+ channel associates
with the glycolytic enzyme complex. FASEB J. 25:2456–2467. https://doi
.org/10.1096/fj.10-176669
Hori, M., and M. Kitakaze. 1991. Adenosine, the heart, and coronary circulation. Hypertension. 18:565–574. https://doi.org/10.1161/01.HYP.18.5
.565
Horie, M., H. Irisawa, and A. Noma. 1987. Voltage-dependent magnesium
block of adenosine-triphosphate-sensitive potassium channel in
guinea-pig ventricular cells. J. Physiol. 387:251–272. https://doi.org/10
.1113/jphysiol.1987.sp016572
Hosford, P.S., J.A. Wells, S. Nizari, I.N. Christie, S.M. Theparambil, P.A.
Castro, A. Hadjihambi, L.F. Barros, I. Ruminot, M.F. Lythgoe, and A.V.
Gourine. 2022. CO2 signaling mediates neurovascular coupling in the
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 26 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
cerebral cortex. Nat. Commun. 13:2125. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467
-022-29622-9
Hu, Y., and G.S. Wilson. 1997a. Rapid changes in local extracellular rat brain
glucose observed with an in vivo glucose sensor. J. Neurochem. 68:
1745–1752. https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1471-4159.1997.68041745.x
Hu, Y., and G.S. Wilson. 1997b. A temporary local energy pool coupled to
neuronal activity: Fluctuations of extracellular lactate levels in rat brain
monitored with rapid-response enzyme-based sensor. J. Neurochem. 69:
1484–1490. https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1471-4159.1997.69041484.x
Hu, X., and E. Yacoub. 2012. The story of the initial dip in fMRI. Neuroimage.
62:1103–1108. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012.03.005
Huang, Y., D. Hu, C. Huang, and C.G. Nichols. 2019. Genetic discovery of ATPsensitive K+ channels in cardiovascular diseases. Circ. Arrhythm. Electrophysiol. 12:e007322. https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCEP.119.007322
Inagaki, N., T. Gonoi, J.P. Clement IV, N. Namba, J. Inazawa, G. Gonzalez, L.
Aguilar-Bryan, S. Seino, and J. Bryan. 1995. Reconstitution of IKATP: An
inward rectifier subunit plus the sulfonylurea receptor. Science. 270:
1166–1170. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.270.5239.1166
Inagaki, N., T. Gonoi, and S. Seino. 1997. Subunit stoichiometry of the pancreatic β-cell ATP-sensitive K+ channel. FEBS Lett. 409:232–236. https://
doi.org/10.1016/S0014-5793(97)00488-2
Iturria-Medina, Y., R.C. Sotero, P.J. Toussaint, J.M. Mateos-Perez, A.C. Evans, ´
M.W. Weiner, P. Aisen, R. Petersen, C.R. Jack, W. Jagust, et al. 2016.
Early role of vascular dysregulation on late-onset Alzheimer’s disease
based on multifactorial data-driven analysis. Nat. Commun. 7:11934.
https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms11934
Jackson, W.F. 2016. Arteriolar oxygen reactivity: Where is the sensor and
what is the mechanism of action? J. Physiol. 594:5055–5077. https://doi
.org/10.1113/JP270192
Jackson, W.F. 2017. Potassium channels in regulation of vascular smooth
muscle contraction and growth. Adv. Pharmacol. 78:89–144. https://doi
.org/10.1016/bs.apha.2016.07.001
Jackson, W.F. 2022. Endothelial ion channels and cell-cell communication in
the microcirculation. Front. Physiol. 13:805149. https://doi.org/10.3389/
fphys.2022.805149
Jaggar, J.H. 2001. Intravascular pressure regulates local and global Ca(2+)
signaling in cerebral artery smooth muscle cells. Am. J. Physiol. Cell
Physiol. 281:C439–C448. https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpcell.2001.281.2.C439
Jaggar, J.H., V.A. Porter, W.J. Lederer, and M.T. Nelson. 2000. Calcium sparks
in smooth muscle. Am. J. Physiol. Cell Physiol. 278:C235–C256. https://doi
.org/10.1152/ajpcell.2000.278.2.C235
Jenkins, C.M., J. Yang, H.F. Sims, and R.W. Gross. 2011. Reversible high affinity inhibition of phosphofructokinase-1 by acyl-CoA: A mechanism
integrating glycolytic flux with lipid metabolism. J. Biol. Chem. 286:
11937–11950. https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M110.203661
Jovanovic, S., Q. Du, R.M. Crawford, G.R. Budas, I. Stagljar, and A. Jovanovi ´ c. ´
2005. Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase serves as an accessory protein of the cardiac sarcolemmal K(ATP) channel. EMBO Rep. 6:
848–852. https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.embor.7400489
Karagiannis, A., T. Gallopin, A. Lacroix, F. Plaisier, J. Piquet, H. Geoffroy, R.
Hepp, J. Naude, B. Le Gac, R. Egger, et al. 2021. Lactate is an energy ´
substrate for rodent cortical neurons and enhances their firing activity.
Elife. 10:e71424. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.71424
Kasischke, K.A., H.D. Vishwasrao, P.J. Fisher, W.R. Zipfel, and W.W. Webb.
2004. Neural activity triggers neuronal oxidative metabolism followed
by astrocytic glycolysis. Science. 305:99–103. https://doi.org/10.1126/
science.1096485
Kawano, T., V. Zoga, M. Kimura, M.-Y. Liang, H.-E. Wu, G. Gemes, J.B.
McCallum, W.-M. Kwok, Q.H. Hogan, and C.D. Sarantopoulos. 2009.
Nitric oxide activates ATP-sensitive potassium channels in mammalian
sensory neurons: Action by direct S-nitrosylation. Mol. Pain. 5:12.
https://doi.org/10.1186/1744-8069-5-12
Kim, D.-S., T.Q. Duong, and S.-G. Kim. 2000. High-resolution mapping of isoorientation columns by fMRI. Nat. Neurosci. 3:164–169. https://doi.org/
10.1038/72109
Kirst, C., S. Skriabine, A. Vieites-Prado, T. Topilko, P. Bertin, G. Gerschenfeld,
F. Verny, P. Topilko, N. Michalski, M. Tessier-Lavigne, and N. Renier.
2020. Mapping the fine-scale organization and plasticity of the brain
vasculature. Cell. 180:780–795.e25. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2020
.01.028
Klug, N.R., M. Sancho, A.L. Gonzales, T.J. Heppner, R.I.C. O’Brien, D. HillEubanks, and M.T. Nelson. 2023. Intraluminal pressure elevates intracellular calcium and contracts CNS pericytes: Role of voltage-dependent
calcium channels. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 120:e2216421120. https://doi
.org/10.1073/pnas.2216421120
Knot, H.J., and M.T. Nelson. 1995. Regulation of membrane potential and
diameter by voltage-dependent K+ channels in rabbit myogenic cerebral
arteries. Am. J. Physiol. 269:H348–H355. https://doi.org/10.1152/
ajpheart.1995.269.1.H348
Knot, H.J., and M.T. Nelson. 1998. Regulation of arterial diameter and wall
[Ca2+] in cerebral arteries of rat by membrane potential and intravascular pressure. J. Physiol. 508:199–209. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469
-7793.1998.199br.x
Kotecha, N., and M.A. Hill. 2005. Myogenic contraction in rat skeletal muscle
arterioles: Smooth muscle membrane potential and Ca(2+) signaling.
Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol. 289:H1326–H1334. https://doi.org/10
.1152/ajpheart.00323.2005
Krucker, T., A. Lang, and E.P. Meyer. 2006. New polyurethane-based material for vascular corrosion casting with improved physical and
imaging characteristics. Microsc. Res. Tech. 69:138–147. https://doi.org/
10.1002/jemt.20263
Kubo, Y., and Y. Murata. 2001. Control of rectification and permeation by two
distinct sites after the second transmembrane region in Kir2.1 K+
channel. J. Physiol. 531:645–660. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-7793.2001
.0645h.x
Kubo, M., Y. Nakaya, S. Matsuoka, K. Saito, and Y. Kuroda. 1994. Atrial natriuretic factor and isosorbide dinitrate modulate the gating of ATPsensitive K+ channels in cultured vascular smooth muscle cells. Circ. Res.
74:471–476. https://doi.org/10.1161/01.RES.74.3.471
Lamb, T.W., M.M. Cebrik, J.S. Kaiser, C.F. Belanger Jr., A.B. Munro, and A.B.
Munro. 1966. Skeletal muscle blood flow during hypercapnic hyperventilation. Respir. Physiol. 1:249–257. https://doi.org/10.1016/0034
-5687(66)90044-2
Lamb, I.R., N.M. Novielli, and C.L. Murrant. 2018. Capillary response to
skeletal muscle contraction: Evidence that redundancy between vasodilators is physiologically relevant during active hyperaemia. J. Physiol.
596:1357–1372. https://doi.org/10.1113/JP275467
Larcombe-McDouall, J., N. Buttell, N. Harrison, and S. Wray. 1999. In vivo pH
and metabolite changes during a single contraction in rat uterine
smooth muscle. J. Physiol. 518:783–790. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469
-7793.1999.0783p.x
Lederer, W.J., H. Cheng, L.F. Santana, A.M. Gomez, T.B. Rogers, M.B. Cannell,
M. Rubart, and M.T. Nelson. 1996. Molecular understanding of
excitation-contraction coupling and vascular flow control in heart
muscle. In Tissue Oxygen Deprivation: From Molecular to Integrated
Function. G.G. Haddad and G. Lister, editors. Taylor & Francis, New
York. 497–513.
Ledo, A., E. Fernandes, A. Salvador, J. Laranjinha, and R.M. Barbosa. 2022. In
vivo hydrogen peroxide diffusivity in brain tissue supports volume
signaling activity. Redox Biol. 50:102250. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.redox
.2022.102250
Ledoux, J., M.S. Taylor, A.D. Bonev, R.M. Hannah, V. Solodushko, B. Shui, Y.
Tallini, M.I. Kotlikoff, and M.T. Nelson. 2008. Functional architecture
of inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate signaling in restricted spaces of myoendothelial projections. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 105:9627–9632.
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0801963105
Lee, K.P.K., J. Chen, and R. MacKinnon. 2017. Molecular structure of human
KATP in complex with ATP and ADP. Elife. 6:e32481. https://doi.org/10
.7554/eLife.32481
Lee, M.D., C. Wilson, C.D. Saunter, C. Kennedy, J.M. Girkin, and J.G.
McCarron. 2018. Spatially structured cell populations process multiple
sensory signals in parallel in intact vascular endothelium. Sci. Signal. 11:
eaar4411. https://doi.org/10.1126/scisignal.aar4411
Lennicke, C., J. Rahn, R. Lichtenfels, L.A. Wessjohann, and B. Seliger. 2015.
Hydrogen peroxide: Production, fate and role in redox signaling of
tumor cells. Cell Commun. Signal. 13:39. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12964
-015-0118-6
Li, N., J.-X. Wu, D. Ding, J. Cheng, N. Gao, and L. Chen. 2017. Structure of a
pancreatic ATP-sensitive potassium channel. Cell. 168:101–110.e10.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2016.12.028
Li, H., C. Guglielmetti, Y.J. Sei, M. Zilberter, L.M. Le Page, L. Shields, J. Yang,
K. Nguyen, B. Tiret, X. Gao, et al. 2023. Neurons require glucose uptake
and glycolysis in vivo. Cell Rep. 42:112335. https://doi.org/10.1016/j
.celrep.2023.112335
Lindauer, U., A. Kunz, S. Schuh-Hofer, J. Vogt, J.P. Dreier, and U. Dirnagl.
2001a. Nitric oxide from perivascular nerves modulates cerebral arterial pH reactivity. Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol. 281:H1353–H1363.
https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpheart.2001.281.3.H1353
Lindauer, U., G. Royl, C. Leithner, M. Kühl, L. Gold, J. Gethmann, M. KohlBareis, A. Villringer, and U. Dirnagl. 2001b. No evidence for early
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 27 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
decrease in blood oxygenation in rat whisker cortex in response to
functional activation. Neuroimage. 13:988–1001. https://doi.org/10
.1006/nimg.2000.0709
Liss, B., and J. Roeper. 2001. Molecular physiology of neuronal K-ATP
channels (review). Mol. Membr. Biol. 18:117–127. https://doi.org/10.1080/
09687680110047373
Little, T.L., E.C. Beyer, and B.R. Duling. 1995a. Connexin 43 and connexin 40
gap junctional proteins are present in arteriolar smooth muscle and
endothelium in vivo. Am. J. Physiol. 268:H729–H739. https://doi.org/10
.1152/ajpheart.1995.268.2.H729
Little, T.L., J. Xia, and B.R. Duling. 1995b. Dye tracers define differential endothelial and smooth muscle coupling patterns within the arteriolar
wall. Circ. Res. 76:498–504. https://doi.org/10.1161/01.RES.76.3.498
Litvinukov ˇ a, M., C. Talavera-López, H. Maatz, D. Reichart, C.L. Worth, E.L. ´
Lindberg, M. Kanda, K. Polanski, M. Heinig, M. Lee, et al. 2020. Cells of
the adult human heart. Nature. 588:466–472. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41586-020-2797-4
Logothetis, N. 2000. Can current fMRI techniques reveal the microarchitecture of cortex? Nat. Neurosci. 3:413–414. https://doi.org/10
.1038/74768
Longden, T.A., and M.T. Nelson. 2015. Vascular inward rectifier K+ channels
as external K+ sensors in the control of cerebral blood flow. Microcirculation. 22:183–196. https://doi.org/10.1111/micc.12190
Longden, T.A., F. Dabertrand, D.C. Hill-Eubanks, S.E. Hammack, and M.T.
Nelson. 2014. Stress-induced glucocorticoid signaling remodels neurovascular coupling through impairment of cerebrovascular inwardly
rectifying K+ channel function. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 111:7462–7467.
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1401811111
Longden, T.A., F. Dabertrand, M. Koide, A.L. Gonzales, N.R. Tykocki, J.E.
Brayden, D. Hill-Eubanks, and M.T. Nelson. 2017. Capillary K+-sensing
initiates retrograde hyperpolarization to increase local cerebral blood
flow. Nat. Neurosci. 20:717–726. https://doi.org/10.1038/nn.4533
Longden, T.A., A. Mughal, G.W. Hennig, O.F. Harraz, B. Shui, F.K. Lee, J.C.
Lee, S. Reining, M.I. Kotlikoff, G.M. Konig, et al. 2021. Local IP ¨ 3
receptor-mediated Ca2+ signals compound to direct blood flow in brain
capillaries. Sci. Adv. 7:eabh0101. https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.abh0101
Longden, T.A., G. Zhao, A. Hariharan, and W.J. Lederer. 2023. Pericytes and
the control of blood flow in brain and heart. Annu. Rev. Physiol. 85:
137–164. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-physiol-031522-034807
López-Ot´ın, C., M.A. Blasco, L. Partridge, M. Serrano, and G. Kroemer. 2023.
Hallmarks of aging: An expanding universe. Cell. 186:243–278. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2022.11.001
Lu, Z., and R. MacKinnon. 1994. Electrostatic tuning of Mg2+ affinity in an
inward-rectifier K+ channel. Nature. 371:243–246. https://doi.org/10
.1038/371243a0
Lu, T., D. Ye, X. Wang, J.M. Seubert, J.P. Graves, J.A. Bradbury, D.C. Zeldin,
and H.-C. Lee. 2006. Cardiac and vascular KATP channels in rats are
activated by endogenous epoxyeicosatrienoic acids through different
mechanisms. J. Physiol. 575:627–644. https://doi.org/10.1113/jphysiol
.2006.113985
Lundgaard, I., B. Li, L. Xie, H. Kang, S. Sanggaard, J.D.R. Haswell, W. Sun, S.
Goldman, S. Blekot, M. Nielsen, et al. 2015. Direct neuronal glucose
uptake heralds activity-dependent increases in cerebral metabolism.
Nat. Commun. 6:6807. https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms7807
Lyons, D.G., A. Parpaleix, M. Roche, and S. Charpak. 2016. Mapping oxygen
concentration in the awake mouse brain. Elife. 5:e12024. https://doi
.org/10.7554/eLife.12024
Ma, Y., M.A. Shaik, S.H. Kim, M.G. Kozberg, D.N. Thibodeaux, H.T. Zhao, H.
Yu, and E.M.C. Hillman. 2016. Wide-field optical mapping of neural
activity and brain haemodynamics: Considerations and novel approaches. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 371:20150360. https://doi
.org/10.1098/rstb.2015.0360
MacGregor, G.G., K. Dong, C.G. Vanoye, L. Tang, G. Giebisch, and S.C. Hebert.
2002. Nucleotides and phospholipids compete for binding to the C
terminus of KATP channels. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 99:2726–2731.
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.042688899
Majmundar, A.J., W.J. Wong, and M.C. Simon. 2010. Hypoxia-inducible factors and the response to hypoxic stress. Mol. Cell. 40:294–309. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2010.09.022
Martin, G.M., C. Yoshioka, E.A. Rex, J.F. Fay, Q. Xie, M.R. Whorton, J.Z. Chen,
and S.-L. Shyng. 2017. Cryo-EM structure of the ATP-sensitive potassium channel illuminates mechanisms of assembly and gating. Elife. 6:
e24149. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.24149
Mart´ınez-François, J.R., M.C. Fernandez-Agüera, N. Nathwani, C. Lahmann, ´
V.L. Burnham, N.N. Danial, and G. Yellen. 2018. BAD and KATP channels
regulate neuron excitability and epileptiform activity. Elife. 7:e32721.
https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.32721
Masia, R., D.D. De Leon, C. MacMullen, H. McKnight, C.A. Stanley, and C.G.
Nichols. 2007. A mutation in the TMD0-L0 region of sulfonylurea
receptor-1 (L225P) causes permanent neonatal diabetes mellitus
(PNDM). Diabetes. 56:1357–1362. https://doi.org/10.2337/db06-1746
Masoud, G.N., and W. Li. 2015. HIF-1α pathway: Role, regulation and intervention for cancer therapy. Acta Pharm. Sin. B. 5:378–389. https://doi
.org/10.1016/j.apsb.2015.05.007
Matoba, T., H. Shimokawa, M. Nakashima, Y. Hirakawa, Y. Mukai, K. Hirano,
H. Kanaide, and A. Takeshita. 2000. Hydrogen peroxide is an
endothelium-derived hyperpolarizing factor in mice. J. Clin. Invest. 106:
1521–1530. https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI10506
Matsuno-Yagi, A., and Y. Hatefi. 1988. Estimation of the turnover number of
bovine heart F0F1 complexes for ATP synthesis. Biochemistry. 27:
335–340. https://doi.org/10.1021/bi00401a050
McCarron, J.G., and W. Halpern. 1990. Potassium dilates rat cerebral arteries
by two independent mechanisms. Am. J. Physiol. 259:H902–H908.
https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpheart.1990.259.3.H902
McCarron, J.G., M.D. Lee, and C. Wilson. 2017. The endothelium solves
problems that endothelial cells do not know exist. Trends Pharmacol. Sci.
38:322–338. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tips.2017.01.008
McClenaghan, C., A. Hanson, M. Sala-Rabanal, H.I. Roessler, D. Josifova, D.K.
Grange, G. van Haaften, and C.G. Nichols. 2018. Cantu syndromeassociated SUR2 (ABCC9) mutations in distinct structural domains result in KATP channel gain-of-function by differential mechanisms.
J. Biol. Chem. 293:2041–2052. https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.RA117.000351
McConell, G.K., G.D. Wadley, K. Le Plastrier, and K.C. Linden. 2020. Skeletal
muscle AMPK is not activated during 2 h of moderate intensity exercise
at ∼65% [Formula: See text] in endurance trained men. J. Physiol. 598:
3859–3870. https://doi.org/10.1113/JP277619
McGahren, E.D., J.M. Beach, and B.R. Duling. 1998. Capillaries demonstrate
changes in membrane potential in response to pharmacological stimuli.
Am. J. Physiol. 274:H60–H65. https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpheart.1998.274.1
.H60
McNay, E.C., and P.E. Gold. 2001. Age-related differences in hippocampal
extracellular fluid glucose concentration during behavioral testing and
following systemic glucose administration. J. Gerontol. A. Biol. Sci. Med.
Sci. 56:B66–B71. https://doi.org/10.1093/gerona/56.2.B66
McNay, E.C., R.C. McCarty, and P.E. Gold. 2001. Fluctuations in brain glucose
concentration during behavioral testing: Dissociations between brain
areas and between brain and blood. Neurobiol. Learn. Mem. 75:325–337.
https://doi.org/10.1006/nlme.2000.3976
Meng, G., J. Zhong, Q. Zhang, J.S.J. Wong, J. Wu, K.K. Tsia, and N. Ji. 2022.
Ultrafast two-photon fluorescence imaging of cerebral blood circulation
in the mouse brain in vivo. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 119:e2117346119.
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2117346119
Mercado, J., R. Baylie, M.F. Navedo, C. Yuan, J.D. Scott, M.T. Nelson, J.E.
Brayden, and L.F. Santana. 2014. Local control of TRPV4 channels by
AKAP150-targeted PKC in arterial smooth muscle. J. Gen. Physiol. 143:
559–575. https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.201311050
Mergenthaler, P., U. Lindauer, G.A. Dienel, and A. Meisel. 2013. Sugar for the
brain: The role of glucose in physiological and pathological brain
function. Trends Neurosci. 36:587–597. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tins
.2013.07.001
Metallo, C.M., and M.G. Vander Heiden. 2013. Understanding metabolic
regulation and its influence on cell physiology. Mol. Cell. 49:388–398.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2013.01.018
Miodonski, A., and A. Jasi ´ nski. 1979. Scanning electron microscopy of mi- ´
crocorrosion casts of the vascular bed in the skin of the spotted salamander, Salamandra salamandra L. Cell Tissue Res. 196:153–162. https://
doi.org/10.1007/BF00236356
Mironova, G.Y., P.M. Kowalewska, M. El-Lakany, C.H.T. Tran, M. Sancho, A.
Zechariah, W.F. Jackson, and D.G. Welsh. 2023. The conducted vasomotor response and the principles of electrical communication in resistance arteries. Physiol. Rev. In press.
Mita, M., M. Ito, K. Harada, I. Sugawara, H. Ueda, T. Tsuboi, and T. Kitaguchi.
2019. Green fluorescent protein-based glucose indicators report glucose
dynamics in living cells. Anal. Chem. 91:4821–4830. https://doi.org/10
.1021/acs.analchem.9b00447
Moshkforoush, A., B. Ashenagar, O.F. Harraz, F. Dabertrand, T.A. Longden,
M.T. Nelson, and N.M. Tsoukias. 2020. The capillary Kir channel as
sensor and amplifier of neuronal signals: Modeling insights on K+-
mediated neurovascular communication. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 117:
16626–16637. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2000151117
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 28 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
Mufti, R.E., S.E. Brett, C.H.T. Tran, R. Abd El-Rahman, Y. Anfinogenova, A.
El-Yazbi, W.C. Cole, P.P. Jones, S.R.W. Chen, and D.G. Welsh. 2010.
Intravascular pressure augments cerebral arterial constriction by inducing voltage-insensitive Ca2+ waves. J. Physiol. 588:3983–4005.
https://doi.org/10.1113/jphysiol.2010.193300
Murphy, M.E., and J.E. Brayden. 1995. Nitric oxide hyperpolarizes rabbit
mesenteric arteries via ATP-sensitive potassium channels. J. Physiol.
486:47–58. https://doi.org/10.1113/jphysiol.1995.sp020789
Nelson, M.T., and J.M. Quayle. 1995. Physiological roles and properties of
potassium channels in arterial smooth muscle. Am. J. Physiol. 268:
C799–C822. https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpcell.1995.268.4.C799
Nelson, M.T., H. Cheng, M. Rubart, L.F. Santana, A.D. Bonev, H.J. Knot, and
W.J. Lederer. 1995. Relaxation of arterial smooth muscle by calcium
sparks. Science. 270:633–637. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.270.5236
.633
Nichols, C.G. 2006. KATP channels as molecular sensors of cellular metabolism. Nature. 440:470–476. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature04711
Nichols, C.G., and W.J. Lederer. 1990. The regulation of ATP-sensitive K+
channel activity in intact and permeabilized rat ventricular myocytes.
J. Physiol. 423:91–110. https://doi.org/10.1113/jphysiol.1990.sp018013
Nickenig, G., and D.G. Harrison. 2002. The AT(1)-type angiotensin receptor in
oxidative stress and atherogenesis: Part I: Oxidative stress and atherogenesis. Circulation. 105:393–396. https://doi.org/10.1161/hc0302.102618
Noma, A. 1983. ATP-regulated K+ channels in cardiac muscle. Nature. 305:
147–148. https://doi.org/10.1038/305147a0
Norman, J.N., J. MacIntyre, J.R. Shearer Jr., I.M. Craigen, and G. Smith. 1970.
Effect of carbon dioxide on renal blood flow. Am. J. Physiol. 219:672–676.
https://doi.org/10.1152/ajplegacy.1970.219.3.672
Nose, K. 2000. Role of reactive oxygen species in the regulation of physiological functions. Biol. Pharm. Bull. 23:897–903. https://doi.org/10.1248/
bpb.23.897
Obel, L.F., M.S. Müller, A.B. Walls, H.M. Sickmann, L.K. Bak, H.S. Waagepetersen, and A. Schousboe. 2012. Brain glycogen-new perspectives on
its metabolic function and regulation at the subcellular level. Front.
Neuroenergetics. 4:3. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnene.2012.00003
Offenhauser, N., K. Thomsen, K. Caesar, and M. Lauritzen. 2005. Activityinduced tissue oxygenation changes in rat cerebellar cortex: Interplay
of postsynaptic activation and blood flow. J. Physiol. 565:279–294.
https://doi.org/10.1113/jphysiol.2005.082776
Ornelas, S., A.-A. Berthiaume, S.K. Bonney, V. Coelho-Santos, R.G. Underly,
A. Kremer, C.J. Guerin, S. Lippens, and A.Y. Shih. 2021. Three- ´
dimensional ultrastructure of the brain pericyte-endothelial interface.
J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 41:2185–2200. https://doi.org/10.1177/
0271678X211012836
Ottolini, M., K. Hong, E.L. Cope, Z. Daneva, L.J. DeLalio, J.D. Sokolowski, C.
Marziano, N.Y. Nguyen, J. Altschmied, J. Haendeler, et al. 2020. Local
peroxynitrite impairs endothelial transient receptor potential vanilloid
4 channels and elevates blood pressure in obesity. Circulation. 141:
1318–1333. https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.119.043385
Owen, M.K., F.A. Witzmann, M.L. McKenney, X. Lai, Z.C. Berwick, S.P.
Moberly, M. Alloosh, M. Sturek, and J.D. Tune. 2013. Perivascular adipose tissue potentiates contraction of coronary vascular smooth muscle: Influence of obesity. Circulation. 128:9–18. https://doi.org/10.1161/
CIRCULATIONAHA.112.001238
Oz, G., P.G. Henry, E.R. Seaquist, and R. Gruetter. 2003. Direct, noninvasive ¨
measurement of brain glycogen metabolism in humans. Neurochem. Int.
43:323–329. https://doi.org/10.1016/s0197-0186(03)00019-6
Oz, G., E.R. Seaquist, A. Kumar, A.B. Criego, L.E. Benedict, J.P. Rao, P.-G. ¨
Henry, P.F. Van De Moortele, and R. Gruetter. 2007. Human brain
glycogen content and metabolism: Implications on its role in brain
energy metabolism. Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab. 292:E946–E951.
https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpendo.00424.2006
Oz, G., M. DiNuzzo, A. Kumar, A. Moheet, and E.R. Seaquist. 2015. Revisiting ¨
glycogen content in the human brain. Neurochem. Res. 40:2473–2481.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11064-015-1664-4
Parpaleix, A., Y. Goulam Houssen, and S. Charpak. 2013. Imaging local neuronal activity by monitoring PO₂ transients in capillaries. Nat. Med. 19:
241–246. https://doi.org/10.1038/nm.3059
Patel, S., and S. Sharma. 2023. Respiratory acidosis. In StatPearls. StatPearls
Publishing, Treasure Island, FL.
Patel, A.B., J.C. Lai, G.M. Chowdhury, F. Hyder, D.L. Rothman, R.G. Shulman,
and K.L. Behar. 2014. Direct evidence for activity-dependent glucose
phosphorylation in neurons with implications for the astrocyte-toneuron lactate shuttle. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 111:5385–5390. https://
doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1403576111
Pellerin, L., and P.J. Magistretti. 1994. Glutamate uptake into astrocytes
stimulates aerobic glycolysis: A mechanism coupling neuronal activity
to glucose utilization. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 91:10625–10629. https://
doi.org/10.1073/pnas.91.22.10625
Peng, W., C. Tan, L. Mo, J. Jiang, W. Zhou, J. Du, X. Zhou, X. Liu, and L. Chen.
2021. Glucose transporter 3 in neuronal glucose metabolism: Health and
diseases. Metabolism. 123:154869. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.metabol.2021
.154869
Pipatpolkai, T., R.A. Corey, P. Proks, F.M. Ashcroft, and P.J. Stansfeld. 2020.
Evaluating inositol phospholipid interactions with inward rectifier
potassium channels and characterising their role in disease. Commun.
Chem. 3:147. https://doi.org/10.1038/s42004-020-00391-0
Porter, V.A., A.D. Bonev, H.J. Knot, T.J. Heppner, A.S. Stevenson, T. Kleppisch, W.J. Lederer, and M.T. Nelson. 1998. Frequency modulation of
Ca2+ sparks is involved in regulation of arterial diameter by cyclic
nucleotides. Am. J. Physiol. 274:C1346–C1355. https://doi.org/10.1152/
ajpcell.1998.274.5.C1346
Pratt, E.B., Q. Zhou, J.W. Gay, and S.L. Shyng. 2012. Engineered interaction between SUR1 and Kir6.2 that enhances ATP sensitivity in KATP
channels. J. Gen. Physiol. 140:175–187. https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp
.201210803
Prichard, J., D. Rothman, E. Novotny, O. Petroff, T. Kuwabara, M. Avison, A.
Howseman, C. Hanstock, and R. Shulman. 1991. Lactate rise detected by
1H NMR in human visual cortex during physiologic stimulation. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 88:5829–5831. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.88.13
.5829
Proks, P., H. de Wet, and F.M. Ashcroft. 2010. Activation of the K(ATP)
channel by Mg-nucleotide interaction with SUR1. J. Gen. Physiol. 136:
389–405. https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.201010475
Proks, P., H. de Wet, and F.M. Ashcroft. 2014. Sulfonylureas suppress the
stimulatory action of Mg-nucleotides on Kir6.2/SUR1 but not Kir6.2/
SUR2A KATP channels: A mechanistic study. J. Gen. Physiol. 144:
469–486. https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.201411222
Quinn, K.V., Y. Cui, J.P. Giblin, L.H. Clapp, and A. Tinker. 2003. Do anionic
phospholipids serve as cofactors or second messengers for the regulation of activity of cloned ATP-sensitive K+ channels? Circ. Res. 93:
646–655. https://doi.org/10.1161/01.RES.0000095247.81449.8E
Quistorff, B., Rabinowitz, J.D., and S. Enerback. 2020. Lactate: The ugly ¨
duckling of energy metabolism. Nat. Metab. 2:566–571. https://doi.org/
10.1038/s42255-020-0243-4
Raeis, V., P. Philip-Couderc, A. Roatti, W. Habre, J. Sierra, A. Kalangos, M.
Beghetti, and A.J. Baertschi. 2010. Central venous hypoxemia is a determinant of human atrial ATP-sensitive potassium channel expression: Evidence for a novel hypoxia-inducible factor 1alpha-Forkhead
box class O signaling pathway. Hypertension. 55:1186–1192. https://doi
.org/10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.109.148767
Raichle, M.E., and M.A. Mintun. 2006. Brain work and brain imaging. Annu.
Rev. Neurosci. 29:449–476. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.neuro.29
.051605.112819
Rasmussen, R., E. Nicholas, N.C. Petersen, A.G. Dietz, Q. Xu, Q. Sun, and M.
Nedergaard. 2019. Cortex-wide changes in extracellular potassium ions
parallel brain state transitions in awake behaving mice. Cell Rep. 28:
1182–1194.e4. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2019.06.082
Ratelade, J., N.R. Klug, D. Lombardi, M.K.S.C. Angelim, F. Dabertrand, V.
Domenga-Denier, R. Al-Shahi Salman, C. Smith, J.-F. Gerbeau, M.T.
Nelson, and A. Joutel. 2020. Reducing hypermuscularization of the
transitional segment between arterioles and capillaries protects against
spontaneous intracerebral hemorrhage. Circulation. 141:2078–2094.
https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.119.040963
Ray, R., C.E. Murdoch, M. Wang, C.X. Santos, M. Zhang, S. Alom-Ruiz, N.
Anilkumar, A. Ouattara, A.C. Cave, S.J. Walker, et al. 2011. Endothelial
Nox4 NADPH oxidase enhances vasodilatation and reduces blood
pressure in vivo. Arterioscler. Thromb. Vasc. Biol. 31:1368–1376. https://
doi.org/10.1161/ATVBAHA.110.219238
Reimann, F., F.M. Gribble, and F.M. Ashcroft. 2000. Differential response of
K(ATP) channels containing SUR2A or SUR2B subunits to nucleotides
and pinacidil. Mol. Pharmacol. 58:1318–1325. https://doi.org/10.1124/mol
.58.6.1318
Rhodin, J.A. 1967. The ultrastructure of mammalian arterioles and precapillary sphincters. J. Ultrastruct. Res. 18:181–223. https://doi.org/10.1016/
S0022-5320(67)80239-9
Rich, P.R. 2003. The molecular machinery of Keilin’s respiratory chain. Biochem. Soc. Trans. 31:1095–1105. https://doi.org/10.1042/bst0311095
Richardson, R.S., E.A. Noyszewski, K.F. Kendrick, J.S. Leigh, and P.D. Wagner. 1995. Myoglobin O2 desaturation during exercise. Evidence of
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 29 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
limited O2 transport. J. Clin. Invest. 96:1916–1926. https://doi.org/10
.1172/JCI118237
Ritterhoff, J., and R. Tian. 2017. Metabolism in cardiomyopathy: Every substrate matters. Cardiovasc. Res. 113:411–421. https://doi.org/10.1093/cvr/
cvx017
Rodriguez-Baeza, A., F. Reina-De La Torre, M. Ortega-Sanchez, and J. Sahuquillo-Barris. 1998. Perivascular structures in corrosion casts of the
human central nervous system: A confocal laser and scanning electron
microscope study. Anat. Rec. 252:176–184. https://doi.org/10.1002/(SICI)
1097-0185(199810)252:2<176::AID-AR3>3.0.CO;2-1
Rosano, G.M., and C. Vitale. 2018. Metabolic modulation of cardiac metabolism in heart failure. Card. Fail. Rev. 4:99–103. https://doi.org/10.15420/
cfr.2018.18.2
Rosehart, A.C., T.A. Longden, N. Weir, J.T. Fontaine, A. Joutel, and F. Dabertrand. 2021. Prostaglandin E2 dilates intracerebral arterioles when
applied to capillaries: Implications for small vessel diseases. Front. Aging
Neurosci. 13:695965. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnagi.2021.695965
Roth, K., and M.W. Weiner. 1991. Determination of cytosolic ADP and AMP
concentrations and the free energy of ATP hydrolysis in human muscle
and brain tissues with 31P NMR spectroscopy. Magn. Reson. Med. 22:
505–511. https://doi.org/10.1002/mrm.1910220258
Rouach, N., A. Koulakoff, V. Abudara, K. Willecke, and C. Giaume. 2008.
Astroglial metabolic networks sustain hippocampal synaptic transmission. Science. 322:1551–1555. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1164022
Rui, L. 2014. Energy metabolism in the liver. Compr. Physiol. 4:177–197.
https://doi.org/10.1002/cphy.c130024
Sagare, A.P., R.D. Bell, Z. Zhao, Q. Ma, E.A. Winkler, A. Ramanathan, and B.V.
Zlokovic. 2013. Pericyte loss influences Alzheimer-like neurodegeneration in mice. Nat. Commun. 4:2932. https://doi.org/10.1038/
ncomms3932
Sakadzic, S., E. Roussakis, M.A. Yaseen, E.T. Mandeville, V.J. Srinivasan, K. ´
Arai, S. Ruvinskaya, A. Devor, E.H. Lo, S.A. Vinogradov, and D.A. Boas.
2010. Two-photon high-resolution measurement of partial pressure of
oxygen in cerebral vasculature and tissue. Nat. Methods. 7:755–759.
https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.1490
Sancho, M., N.R. Klug, A. Mughal, M. Koide, S.H.l. Cruz, T.J. Heppner, A.D.
Bonev, D. Hill-Eubanks, and M.T. Nelson. 2022. Adenosine signaling
activates ATP-sensitive K+ channels in endothelial cells and pericytes in CNS capillaries. Sci. Signal. 15:eabl5405. https://doi.org/10
.1126/scisignal.abl5405
Satoh, E., M. Yamada, C. Kondo, V.P. Repunte, Y. Horio, T. Iijima, and Y.
Kurachi. 1998. Intracellular nucleotide-mediated gating of SUR/Kir6.0
complex potassium channels expressed in a mammalian cell line and its
modification by pinacidil. J. Physiol. 511:663–674. https://doi.org/10.1111/
j.1469-7793.1998.663bg.x
Schultz, S.G. 1997. Pump-leak parallelism in sodium-absorbing epithelia: The
role of ATP-regulated potassium channels. J. Exp. Zool. 279:476–483.
https://doi.org/10.1002/(SICI)1097-010X(19971201)279:5<476::AID
-JEZ10>3.0.CO;2-6
Segal, S.S., and B.R. Duling. 1989. Conduction of vasomotor responses in arterioles: A role for cell-to-cell coupling? Am. J. Physiol. 256:H838–H845.
https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpheart.1989.256.3.H838
Segal, S.S., D.N. Damon, and B.R. Duling. 1989. Propagation of vasomotor
responses coordinates arteriolar resistances. Am. J. Physiol. 256:
H832–H837. https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpheart.1989.256.3.H832
Seino, S., and T. Miki. 2003. Physiological and pathophysiological roles of
ATP-sensitive K+ channels. Prog. Biophys. Mol. Biol. 81:133–176. https://
doi.org/10.1016/S0079-6107(02)00053-6
Sepp, M., N. Sokolova, S. Jugai, M. Mandel, P. Peterson, and M. Vendelin.
2014. Tight coupling of Na+/K+-ATPase with glycolysis demonstrated in
permeabilized rat cardiomyocytes. PLoS One. 9:e99413. https://doi.org/
10.1371/journal.pone.0099413
Shi, Y., Z. Wu, N. Cui, W. Shi, Y. Yang, X. Zhang, A. Rojas, B.T. Ha, and C.
Jiang. 2007. PKA phosphorylation of SUR2B subunit underscores vascular KATP channel activation by beta-adrenergic receptors. Am.
J. Physiol. Regul. Integr. Comp. Physiol. 293:R1205–R1214. https://doi.org/
10.1152/ajpregu.00337.2007
Shi, Y., X. Chen, Z. Wu, W. Shi, Y. Yang, N. Cui, C. Jiang, and R.W. Harrison.
2008. cAMP-dependent protein kinase phosphorylation produces interdomain movement in SUR2B leading to activation of the vascular
KATP channel. J. Biol. Chem. 283:7523–7530. https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc
.M709941200
Shyng, S., and C.G. Nichols. 1997. Octameric stoichiometry of the KATP
channel complex. J. Gen. Physiol. 110:655–664. https://doi.org/10.1085/
jgp.110.6.655
Shyng, S.L., and C.G. Nichols. 1998. Membrane phospholipid control of nucleotide sensitivity of KATP channels. Science. 282:1138–1141. https://doi
.org/10.1126/science.282.5391.1138
Simpson, I.A., D. Dwyer, D. Malide, K.H. Moley, A. Travis, and S.J. Vannucci.
2008. The facilitative glucose transporter GLUT3: 20 years of distinction. Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab. 295:E242–E253. https://doi.org/10
.1152/ajpendo.90388.2008
Sirotin, Y.B., E.M.C. Hillman, C. Bordier, and A. Das. 2009. Spatiotemporal
precision and hemodynamic mechanism of optical point spreads in alert
primates. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 106:18390–18395. https://doi.org/10
.1073/pnas.0905509106
Song, H.W., K.L. Foreman, B.D. Gastfriend, J.S. Kuo, S.P. Palecek, and E.V.
Shusta. 2020. Transcriptomic comparison of human and mouse brain
microvessels. Sci. Rep. 10:12358. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020
-69096-7
Sonkusare, S.K., A.D. Bonev, J. Ledoux, W. Liedtke, M.I. Kotlikoff, T.J.
Heppner, D.C. Hill-Eubanks, and M.T. Nelson. 2012. Elementary Ca2+
signals through endothelial TRPV4 channels regulate vascular function.
Science. 336:597–601. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1216283
Sonkusare, S.K., T. Dalsgaard, A.D. Bonev, D.C. Hill-Eubanks, M.I. Kotlikoff,
J.D. Scott, L.F. Santana, and M.T. Nelson. 2014. AKAP150-dependent
cooperative TRPV4 channel gating is central to endotheliumdependent vasodilation and is disrupted in hypertension. Sci. Signal.
7:ra66. https://doi.org/10.1126/scisignal.2005052
Sonkusare, S.K., T. Dalsgaard, A.D. Bonev, and M.T. Nelson. 2016. Inward
rectifier potassium (Kir2.1) channels as end-stage boosters of
endothelium-dependent vasodilators. J. Physiol. 594:3271–3285. https://
doi.org/10.1113/JP271652
Spruce, A.E., N.B. Standen, and P.R. Stanfield. 1985. Voltage-dependent ATPsensitive potassium channels of skeletal muscle membrane. Nature. 316:
736–738. https://doi.org/10.1038/316736a0
Stamler, J.S., and G. Meissner. 2001. Physiology of nitric oxide in skeletal
muscle. Physiol. Rev. 81:209–237. https://doi.org/10.1152/physrev.2001
.81.1.209
Standen, N.B., J.M. Quayle, N.W. Davies, J.E. Brayden, Y. Huang, and M.T.
Nelson. 1989. Hyperpolarizing vasodilators activate ATP-sensitive K+
channels in arterial smooth muscle. Science. 245:177–180. https://doi
.org/10.1126/science.2501869
Stockli, J., D.J. Fazakerley, and D.E. James. 2011. GLUT4 exocytosis. ¨ J. Cell Sci.
124:4147–4159. https://doi.org/10.1242/jcs.097063
Straub, S.V., H. Girouard, P.E. Doetsch, R.M. Hannah, M.K. Wilkerson, and
M.T. Nelson. 2009. Regulation of intracerebral arteriolar tone by K(v)
channels: Effects of glucose and PKC. Am. J. Physiol. Cell Physiol. 297:
C788–C796. https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpcell.00148.2009
Straub, A.C., A.W. Lohman, M. Billaud, S.R. Johnstone, S.T. Dwyer, M.Y. Lee,
P.S. Bortz, A.K. Best, L. Columbus, B. Gaston, and B.E. Isakson. 2012.
Endothelial cell expression of haemoglobin α regulates nitric oxide
signalling. Nature. 491:473–477. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature11626
Straub, A.C., A.C. Zeigler, and B.E. Isakson. 2014. The myoendothelial junction: Connections that deliver the message. Physiology. 29:242–249.
https://doi.org/10.1152/physiol.00042.2013
Sugiura, K., S. Mihara, N. Fu, and T. Hisabori. 2020. Real-time monitoring of
the in vivo redox state transition using the ratiometric redox state
sensor protein FROG/B. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 117:16019–16026.
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1918919117
Sullivan, M.N., A.L. Gonzales, P.W. Pires, A. Bruhl, M.D. Leo, W. Li, A. Oulidi,
F.A. Boop, Y. Feng, J.H. Jaggar, et al. 2015. Localized TRPA1 channel Ca2+
signals stimulated by reactive oxygen species promote cerebral artery
dilation. Sci. Signal. 8:ra2. https://doi.org/10.1126/scisignal.2005659
Sung, M.W., Z. Yang, C.M. Driggers, B.L. Patton, B. Mostofian, J.D. Russo, D.M.
Zuckerman, and S.-L. Shyng. 2021. Vascular KATP channel structural
dynamics reveal regulatory mechanism by Mg-nucleotides. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA. 118:e2109441118. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2109441118
Tabula Muris Consortium. 2020. A single-cell transcriptomic atlas characterizes ageing tissues in the mouse. Nature. 583:590–595. https://doi
.org/10.1038/s41586-020-2496-1
Taggart, M.J., and S. Wray. 1998. Hypoxia and smooth muscle function: Key
regulatory events during metabolic stress. J. Physiol. 509:315–325.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-7793.1998.315bn.x
Tajada, S., C.M. Moreno, S. O’Dwyer, S. Woods, D. Sato, M.F. Navedo, and L.F.
Santana. 2017. Distance constraints on activation of TRPV4 channels by
AKAP150-bound PKCα in arterial myocytes. J. Gen. Physiol. 149:639–659.
https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.201611709
Takeda, Y., M.A. Nystoriak, M. Nieves-Cintrón, L.F. Santana, and M.F. Navedo. 2011. Relationship between Ca2+ sparklets and sarcoplasmic
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 30 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
reticulum Ca2+ load and release in rat cerebral arterial smooth muscle.
Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol. 301:H2285–H2294. https://doi.org/10
.1152/ajpheart.00488.2011
Tammaro, P., and F. Ashcroft. 2007. The Kir6.2-F333I mutation differentially
modulates KATP channels composed of SUR1 or SUR2 subunits.
J. Physiol. 581:1259–1269. https://doi.org/10.1113/jphysiol.2007.130211
Tantama, M., J.R. Mart´ınez-François, R. Mongeon, and G. Yellen. 2013.
Imaging energy status in live cells with a fluorescent biosensor of the
intracellular ATP-to-ADP ratio. Nat. Commun. 4:2550. https://doi.org/10
.1038/ncomms3550
Tao, X., J.L. Avalos, J. Chen, and R. MacKinnon. 2009. Crystal structure of the
eukaryotic strong inward-rectifier K+ channel Kir2.2 at 3.1 A resolution.
Science. 326:1668–1674. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1180310
Thakore, P., M.G. Alvarado, S. Ali, A. Mughal, P.W. Pires, E. Yamasaki, H.A.T.
Pritchard, B.E. Isakson, C.H.T. Tran, and S. Earley. 2021. Brain endothelial cell TRPA1 channels initiate neurovascular coupling. Elife. 10:
e63040. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.63040
Thompson, J.K., M.R. Peterson, and R.D. Freeman. 2003. Single-neuron activity and tissue oxygenation in the cerebral cortex. Science. 299:
1070–1072. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1079220
Thompson, J.K., M.R. Peterson, and R.D. Freeman. 2004. High-resolution
neurometabolic coupling revealed by focal activation of visual neurons. Nat. Neurosci. 7:919–920. https://doi.org/10.1038/nn1308
Thorens, B., and M. Mueckler. 2010. Glucose transporters in the 21st century.
Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab. 298:E141–E145. https://doi.org/10.1152/
ajpendo.00712.2009
Tran, C.H.T., M.S. Taylor, F. Plane, S. Nagaraja, N.M. Tsoukias, V. Solodushko, E.J. Vigmond, T. Furstenhaupt, M. Brigdan, and D.G. Welsh.
2012. Endothelial Ca2+ wavelets and the induction of myoendothelial
feedback. Am. J. Physiol. Cell Physiol. 302:C1226–C1242. https://doi.org/
10.1152/ajpcell.00418.2011
Trapp, S., S. Haider, P. Jones, M.S. Sansom, and F.M. Ashcroft. 2003. Identification of residues contributing to the ATP binding site of Kir6.2.
EMBO J. 22:2903–2912. https://doi.org/10.1093/emboj/cdg282
Tsoukias, N.M., D. Goldman, A. Vadapalli, R.N. Pittman, and A.S. Popel. 2007.
A computational model of oxygen delivery by hemoglobin-based oxygen carriers in three-dimensional microvascular networks. J. Theor.
Biol. 248:657–674. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtbi.2007.06.012
Tykocki, N.R., E.M. Boerman, and W.F. Jackson. 2017. Smooth muscle ion
channels and regulation of vascular tone in resistance arteries and
arterioles. Compr. Physiol. 7:485–581. https://doi.org/10.1002/cphy
.c160011
Tzou, W.S., C.E. Korcarz, S.E. Aeschlimann, B.J. Morgan, J.B. Skatrud, and J.H.
Stein. 2007. Coronary flow velocity changes in response to hypercapnia: Assessment by transthoracic Doppler echocardiography. J. Am. Soc.
Echocardiogr. 20:421–426. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.echo.2006.10.002
Urbach, V., E. Van Kerkhove, D. Maguire, and B.J. Harvey. 1996. Cross-talk
between ATP-regulated K+ channels and Na+ transport via cellular
metabolism in frog skin principal cells. J. Physiol. 491:99–109. https://doi
.org/10.1113/jphysiol.1996.sp021199
Vanlandewijck, M., L. He, M.A. Mae, J. Andrae, K. Ando, F. Del Gaudio, K. ¨
Nahar, T. Lebouvier, B. Laviña, L. Gouveia, et al. 2018. A molecular atlas
of cell types and zonation in the brain vasculature. Nature. 554:475–480.
https://doi.org/10.1038/nature25739
Vanzetta, I., and A. Grinvald. 2001. Evidence and lack of evidence for the
initial dip in the anesthetized rat: Implications for human functional
brain imaging. Neuroimage. 13:959–967. https://doi.org/10.1006/nimg
.2001.0843
Voet, D., J.G. Voet, and C.W. Pratt. 2016. Fundamentals of Biochemistry Life at
the Molecular Level. Wiley, Hoboken, NJ.
Voleti, V., K.B. Patel, W. Li, C. Perez Campos, S. Bharadwaj, H. Yu, C. Ford,
M.J. Casper, R.W. Yan, W. Liang, et al. 2019. Real-time volumetric microscopy of in vivo dynamics and large-scale samples with SCAPE 2.0.
Nat. Methods. 16:1054–1062. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-019-0579-4
Wagner, P.D. 2012. Muscle intracellular oxygenation during exercise: Optimization for oxygen transport, metabolism, and adaptive change. Eur.
J. Appl. Physiol. 112:1–8. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00421-011-1955-7
Wall, M., and N. Dale. 2008. Activity-dependent release of adenosine: A
critical re-evaluation of mechanism. Curr. Neuropharmacol. 6:329–337.
https://doi.org/10.2174/157015908787386087
Wang, X., J. Wu, L. Li, F. Chen, R. Wang, and C. Jiang. 2003. Hypercapnic
acidosis activates KATP channels in vascular smooth muscles. Circ. Res.
92:1225–1232. https://doi.org/10.1161/01.RES.0000075601.95738.6D
Wang, Z., Z. Ying, A. Bosy-Westphal, J. Zhang, B. Schautz, W. Later, S.B.
Heymsfield, and M.J. Müller. 2010. Specific metabolic rates of major
organs and tissues across adulthood: Evaluation by mechanistic model
of resting energy expenditure. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 92:1369–1377. https://
doi.org/10.3945/ajcn.2010.29885
Wang, F., Y. Cao, L. Ma, H. Pei, W.D. Rausch, and H. Li. 2018. Dysfunction of
cerebrovascular endothelial cells: Prelude to vascular dementia. Front.
Aging Neurosci. 10:376. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnagi.2018.00376
Weidemann, A., and R.S. Johnson. 2008. Biology of HIF-1α. Cell Death Differ.
15:621–627. https://doi.org/10.1038/cdd.2008.12
Weiss, J.N., N. Venkatesh, and S.T. Lamp. 1992. ATP-sensitive K+ channels
and cellular K+ loss in hypoxic and ischaemic mammalian ventricle.
J. Physiol. 447:649–673. https://doi.org/10.1113/jphysiol.1992.sp019022
Welsh, D.G., and S.S. Segal. 1998. Endothelial and smooth muscle cell conduction in arterioles controlling blood flow. Am. J. Physiol. 274:
H178–H186. https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpheart.1998.274.1.H178
Wende, A.R., M.K. Brahma, G.R. McGinnis, and M.E. Young. 2017. Metabolic
origins of heart failure. JACC Basic Transl. Sci. 2:297–310. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jacbts.2016.11.009
West, G.A., D.C. Leppla, and J.M. Simard. 1992. Effects of external pH on ionic
currents in smooth muscle cells from the basilar artery of the Guinea
pig. Circ. Res. 71:201–209. https://doi.org/10.1161/01.RES.71.1.201
Wilson, C., C.D. Saunter, J.M. Girkin, and J.G. McCarron. 2015. Pressuredependent regulation of Ca2+ signalling in the vascular endothelium.
J. Physiol. 593:5231–5253. https://doi.org/10.1113/JP271157
Wolfle, S.E., D.J. Chaston, K. Goto, S.L. Sandow, F.R. Edwards, and C.E. Hill. ¨
2011. Non-linear relationship between hyperpolarisation and relaxation
enables long distance propagation of vasodilatation. J. Physiol. 589:
2607–2623. https://doi.org/10.1113/jphysiol.2010.202580
Wray, S., and T. Burdyga. 2010. Sarcoplasmic reticulum function in smooth
muscle. Physiol. Rev. 90:113–178. https://doi.org/10.1152/physrev.00018.2008
Wu, J.-X., D. Ding, M. Wang, Y. Kang, X. Zeng, and L. Chen. 2018. Ligand
binding and conformational changes of SUR1 subunit in pancreatic
ATP-sensitive potassium channels. Protein Cell. 9:553–567. https://doi
.org/10.1007/s13238-018-0530-y
Wu, Z., Y. Cui, H. Wang, H. Wu, Y. Wan, B. Li, L. Wang, S. Pan, W. Peng, A.
Dong, et al. 2023. Neuronal activity-induced, equilibrative nucleoside
transporter-dependent, somatodendritic adenosine release revealed by
a GRAB sensor. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 120:e2212387120. https://doi
.org/10.1073/pnas.2212387120
Xi, Q., A. Adebiyi, G. Zhao, K.E. Chapman, C.M. Waters, A. Hassid, and J.H.
Jaggar. 2008. IP3 constricts cerebral arteries via IP3 receptormediated TRPC3 channel activation and independently of sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca2+ release. Circ. Res. 102:1118–1126. https://doi
.org/10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.108.173948
Xia, J., and B.R. Duling. 1998. Patterns of excitation-contraction coupling in
arterioles: Dependence on time and concentration. Am. J. Physiol. 274:
H323–H330. https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpheart.1998.274.1.H323
Xie, L.-H., S.A. John, and J.N. Weiss. 2002. Spermine block of the strong inward
rectifier potassium channel Kir2.1: Dual roles of surface charge screening and
pore block. J. Gen. Physiol. 120:53–66. https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.20028576
Yamada, M., S. Isomoto, S. Matsumoto, C. Kondo, T. Shindo, Y. Horio, and Y.
Kurachi. 1997. Sulphonylurea receptor 2B and Kir6.1 form a
sulphonylurea-sensitive but ATP-insensitive K+ channel. J. Physiol. 499:
715–720. https://doi.org/10.1113/jphysiol.1997.sp021963
Yamamoto, Y., K. Imaeda, and H. Suzuki. 1999. Endothelium-dependent
hyperpolarization and intercellular electrical coupling in Guinea-pig
mesenteric arterioles. J. Physiol. 514:505–513. https://doi.org/10.1111/j
.1469-7793.1999.505ae.x
Yamamura, H., Y. Suzuki, H. Yamamura, K. Asai, W. Giles, and Y. Imaizumi.
2018. Hypoxic stress upregulates Kir2.1 expression by a pathway including hypoxic-inducible factor-1α and dynamin2 in brain capillary
endothelial cells. Am. J. Physiol. Cell Physiol. 315:C202–C213. https://doi
.org/10.1152/ajpcell.00154.2017
Yamanishi, S., K. Katsumura, T. Kobayashi, and D.G. Puro. 2006. Extracellular lactate as a dynamic vasoactive signal in the rat retinal microvasculature. Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol. 290:H925–H934. https://
doi.org/10.1152/ajpheart.01012.2005
Yang, H.-Q., E. Subbotina, R. Ramasamy, and W.A. Coetzee. 2016. Cardiovascular KATP channels and advanced aging. Pathobiol. Aging Age Relat.
Dis. 6:32517. https://doi.org/10.3402/pba.v6.32517
Yang, H.-Q., W. Martinez-Ortiz, J. Hwang, X. Fan, T.J. Cardozo, and W.A.
Coetzee. 2020. Palmitoylation of the KATP channel Kir6.2 subunit promotes channel opening by regulating PIP2 sensitivity. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. USA. 117:10593–10602. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1918088117
Yang, A.C., R.T. Vest, F. Kern, D.P. Lee, M. Agam, C.A. Maat, P.M. Losada,
M.B. Chen, N. Schaum, N. Khoury, et al. 2022. A human brain vascular
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 31 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024
atlas reveals diverse mediators of Alzheimer’s risk. Nature. 603:
885–892. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-021-04369-3
Yaniv, Y., M. Juhaszova, H.B. Nuss, S. Wang, D.B. Zorov, E.G. Lakatta, and S.J.
Sollott. 2010. Matching ATP supply and demand in mammalian heart:
In vivo, in vitro, and in silico perspectives. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 1188:
133–142. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1749-6632.2009.05093.x
Young, J. 1929. Malpighi’s “De Pulmonibus”. Proc. R. Soc. Med. 23:1–11. https://
doi.org/10.1177/003591572902300101
Yuan, H.-X., Y. Xiong, and K.-L. Guan. 2013. Nutrient sensing, metabolism,
and cell growth control. Mol. Cell. 49:379–387. https://doi.org/10.1016/j
.molcel.2013.01.019
Zambach, S.A., C. Cai, H.C.C. Helms, B.O. Hald, Y. Dong, J.C. Fordsmann, R.M.
Nielsen, J. Hu, M. Lønstrup, B. Brodin, and M.J. Lauritzen. 2021.
Precapillary sphincters and pericytes at first-order capillaries as key
regulators for brain capillary perfusion. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 118:
e2023749118. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2023749118
Zhao, C., and R. MacKinnon. 2021. Molecular structure of an open human
KATP channel. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 118:e2112267118. https://doi.org/
10.1073/pnas.2112267118
Zhao, G., H.C. Joca, M.T. Nelson, and W.J. Lederer. 2020a. ATP- and voltagedependent electro-metabolic signaling regulates blood flow in heart.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 117:7461–7470. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas
.1922095117
Zhao, G., H.C. Joca, and W.J. Lederer. 2020b. Dynamic measurement and
imaging of capillaries, arterioles, and pericytes in mouse heart. J. Vis.
Exp. https://doi.org/10.3791/61566
Longden and Lederer Journal of General Physiology 32 of 32
Electro-metabolic signaling connects metabolic demand to energy supply https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.202313451
Downloaded from http://rupress.org/jgp/article-pdf/156/2/e202313451/1922777/jgp_202313451.pdf?guestAccessKey=afcc16d4-5631-4d12-a5a5-631de5ad7772 by guest on 17 January 2024


208
Simulation of Action Potentials From
Metabolically Impaired Cardiac Myocytes
Role of ATP-Sensitive K+
 Current
Jose M. Ferrero, Jr, Javier Saiz, Jose M. Ferrero, Nitish V. Thakor
Abstract The role of the ATP-sensitive K+
 current (IK-ATP)
and its contribution to electrophysiological changes that occur
during metabolic impairment in cardiac ventricular myocytes is
still being discussed. The aim of this work was to quantitatively
study this issue by using computer modeling. A model of IK_ATP
is formulated and incorporated into the Luo-Rudy ionic model of
the ventricular action potential. Action potentials under different
degrees of activation of IK-ATP are simulated. Our results show
that in normal ionic concentrations, only »0.6% of the KATP
channels, when open, should account for a 50% reduction in action potential duration. However, increased levels of intracellular
Mg2+
 counteract this shortening. Under conditions of high [K+
]o,
such as those found in early ischemia, the activation of only
=0.4% of the KATP channels could account for a 50% reduction
I
t is well known that myocardial hypoxia and ischemia
cause profound changes in the electrophysiological
properties of cardiac tissue. One of the major
changes that occur in ventricular muscle cells during
metabolic impairment is shortening of the AP.' The reduction of APD initially causes a shortening of the refractory period,2
 and this can facilitate the appearance of
reentrant-type arrhythmias.2
 The reduction of APD during ischemia can partly be explained by an increased
[K+
]O,
3
'
4
 but additional factors seem to be involved in AP
shortening. Indeed, during hypoxic perfusion, the AP is
known to shorten in the absence of extracellular K+
accumulation.l>5
Since KATP channels were first described by Noma,6
their contribution to the shortening of the AP during hypoxia and ischemia and to other electrophysiological
changes has been debated and is still not completely clarified. The major argument against the role of the KATp
channels during early ischemia is that the value of [ATP]j
needed to open 50% of the channels is two orders of
magnitude below the measured [ATP]i bulk level in the
first phase of ischemia.7
 Thus, the fraction of channels
activated during early ischemia is likely to be very low,
and from this point of view, the current carried by KATp
channels (IK-ATP) might not seem to contribute signifiReceived November 27, 1995; accepted May 10, 1996. From the Laboratorio Integrado de B»oingenieria (J.M.F. Jr, J.S., J.M.F.), Departamento de Ingeniena Electronica, Universidad Poli- tecnica de Valencia, Valencia, Spain, and the Department of Bio- medical Engineering (J.M.F. Jr, J.S., N.V.T.), The Johns Hopkins Ur. ersity, Baltimore, Md.
Reprint requests to Dr Jose Maiia Ferrero, Jr, Laboratorio Integrado de Bioingenieria, Universidad Politecnica de Valencia, Camino de Vera s/n, 46020 Valencia, Spain. E-mail cferrero@pleiades.upv.es.
© 1996 American Heart Association, Inc.
in action potential duration. Thus, our results suggest that opening
of IK-ATP channels should play a significant role in action potential
shortening during hypoxic/ischemic episodes, with the fraction
of open channels involved being very low (<1%). However, the
results of the model suggest that activation of IK-ATP alone does
not quantitatively account for the observed K+
 efflux in metabolically impaired cardiac myocytes. Mechanisms other than
KATP channel activation should be responsible for a significant
part of the K+
 efflux measured in hypoxic/ischemic situations.
(Circ Res. 1996;79:208-221.)
Key Words • computer model • ATP-regulated channels
• myocardial ischemia • action potential shortening • K+
efflux
cantly to the AP shortening and other ischemia-related
electrophysiological changes.4
'
7
 Moreover, because IKATP
channel blockers, such as glibenclamide, only partially
prevent hypoxic/ischemic AP shortening, it has been suggested that currents other than IK.ATp must significantly
contribute to APD reduction.89
On the other hand, it has also been suggested that only
a small number of KATp channels need to be activated to
account for the changes observed in AP configuration.
Following this "spare-channel hypothesis" suggested by
Cook et al,10
 several investigators have found indirect
experimental evidence that supports this idea in the case
of cardiac myocytes.11"
14
 However, because of the difficulty of experimentally measuring the fraction of open
KATP channels directly, there is still no direct proof of this
hypothesis, and the quantitative importance of IK-ATP
channel opening in hypoxic/ischemic episodes is not yet
completely established.
The contribution of IK-ATP to cellular K+
 loss during
hypoxic/ischemic situations is not clear either. There exists experimental evidence that supports the idea that IK-ATP
channel activation largelyl415
 or partially1617
 accounts for
K+
 loss from the cell in the first minutes of a hypoxic/
ischemic episode. However, the ineffectiveness of K+
channel openers to enhance the rate of K+
 loss1819
 and
the dissociation between K+
 efflux, AP shortening, and
intracellular ATP levels in hypoxia/ischemia,4
 among
others,20
 are reasons against a major role of IK ATP in this
phenomenon.
The main gc )1 of the present study was to use a computer model to quantitatively study the influence of IK-ATP
on changes in AP configuration and cellular K+
 loss in
metabolically impaired conditions. For this purpose, we
have formulated a detailed model of this current and have
incorporated it into the LR-II model21
 of the guinea pigDownloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on July 29, 2024
Ferrero et al Model of the Cardiac ATP-Sensitive K+
 Current 209
Selected Abbreviations and Acronyms
AP = action potential
APD = AP duration
BCL = basic cycle length
fATP = fraction of open KATP channels
IK.O = total outward K+
 current
•K,T = total K+
 current
IK-ATP = ATP-sensitive K+
 current
IKR = sum of K+
 currents not including IKATP
IKI = inward rectifier K+
 current
Jetdux = K+
 unidirectional efflux rate
AJeidux = net increment in K+
 unidirectional
efflux rate
KATP channel = ATP-sensitive K+
 channel
LR-II model = phase II Luo-Rudy model
VECW = extracellular water volume
Vm = membrane potential
type ventricular cardiac AP. We use this model to study
the relationship between APD and intracellular nucleotide
levels and ionic concentrations. The influence of IK.ATP
activation on reduction of APD during ischemia in the
presence of high [K+
]o has been theoretically elucidated.
Finally, the contribution of IK-ATP to the increase in the
rate of K+
 efflux in hypoxia/ischemia is also theoretically
investigated.
Materials and Methods
Model of IK-ATP
General Considerations
The mathematical model of IK-ATP that we formulate here is
based on different sets of published experimental data describing
the dependence of the channel current density on ion concentrations ([K+
]o, [Mg2+]h and [Na+
]j) and intracellular nucleotide
levels ([ATP]; and [ADP],). The parameters of the model are estimated, when necessary, using a linear least-squares method to
fit the experimental data. The complete set of equations of the
model is given in Appendix 1.
Current Density
The general equation describing the current density
is as follows:
(1) fATp( V m — EK.ATp)
where a is the channel density, g0 is the unitary conductance
of a fully activated individual channel, po is the open probability of a channel in the absence of ATP, fATP is the fraction
of activated channels (relative current), and Vm is the
membrane potential. The term EK.ATP is the reversal potential
of the channel, which is equal to the Nernst potential of K +
ions22
 because of the specificity of the channel to K+
 ions in
cardiac muscle cells.
We have used in our simulations a value of 3.8 channels//jm2
for the channel density (derived from data in Reference 14), a
value that is intermediate in the range of reported values for
guinea pig ventricular myocytes. The open probability in the absence of ATP was assumed to be 0.91.17
 The sensitivity of the
results to these parameters is discussed later.
Unitary Conductance
The expression for the unitary conductance (g0) of an individual KATp channel is as follows:
(2) L, Vm, T)=
for the inward rectification of the channel, and fT is a nondimensional temperature (T)-dependent factor.
The value of y0 is known to depend on [K+
],,.22-
23
 In the
present model, we have used the formulation provided in Reference 22 (see Equation 10 of Appendix 1), which is widely
accepted. On the other hand, KATP channels show inward rectification.2223
 This property is the result of a voltage-dependent block caused by Na+
 and Mg!f
 ions and obeys the laws
of saturation kinetics.23
 We used this approach to express both
factors fM (for Mg2+) and fN (for Na+
) in Equation 2 by means
of Hill-type equations (see Equations 11 and 14 in Appendix
1). The half-maximal saturation constants (Khmn) are given by
Eyring rate theory:
(3) exp Vn
where the subscript "ion" stands for Mg2+
 and Na
 +
 , respectively, K°hjm is the value of Khion at zero membrane voltage,
fiion is
 tn e
 electrical distance, zion is the valence of the considered ion, F is the Faraday constant, R is the gas constant, and
T is the absolute temperature. The values of the parameters
used in our simulations and the details of the equations are
listed in Appendix 1.
It is known that increasing levels of extracellular K+
 partially
remove the voltage-dependent block caused by Mg2+
 ions.23
 This
fact was considered in our model by making Ko
h_Mg increase
monotonically with [K+
]o following a square-root dependence
(see Equation 13 in Appendix 1) to fit data from Horie et al.23
Finally, a temperature-dependent term, fT, was introduced by
using a temperature coefficient Qio= 1 -3 (see Equation 16 in Appendix I).23
Fig 1A illustrates the results obtained with the model of the
unitary conductance in terms of the current-voltage relationships
of the channel. The symbols in both plots represent experimental
values corresponding to different values of [K+
](, (data duplicated
from Reference 24). The solid lines represent the curves predicted
by the model.
Nucleotide Dependence
It is well known that when intracellular ATP molecules bind
to the channel protein, it becomes inactivated. Thus, fATP in a
myocyte strongly depends on [ATPJi. Experimental data612142526
are properly fitted by means of a Hill-type equation:
(4) 1
l+([ATP],/£m)
H
where y0 is the unitary conductance in the absence of intracellular
Na +
 and Mg2 +, fM and fN are nondimensional factors that account
where Km is the half-maximum inhibition constant and H is the
Hill coefficient.
Several factors related to the metabolic state of the cell modulate the [ATP], dependence of fATp (for a review, see Reference
27). Among them, free cytosolic ADP is known to stimulate partially inactivated channels in the presence of Mg2+.
14-
2528
 Both
the half-maximal inhibition constant (Km) and the Hill coefficient
of Equation 4 are dependent on free [ADP]j. Using the data reported by Weiss et al,14
 we have modeled the dependence of fATp
on [ADP]i. Specifically, we used the average values of Km and
Hill coefficients for individual membrane patches obtained by
Weiss et al for different values of [ADP1,. The mathematical expressions that result from the best fit are given in Appendix 1
(see Equations 18 and 19); they show a monotonic increase of
Km and a monotonic decrease of the Hill coefficient with [ADPJ,,
respectively.
The fraction of open channels will depend, in this way, on
intracellular concentrations of both ATP and ADP. Fig IB graphically illustrates this dependence in an appropriate way to easily
relate nucleotide levels to fA]P values. Indeed, these curves can
be used to "translate" a given value of fATP to the different combinations of [ATP];-[ADPJ,, which, when present in the cell, give
rise to such a value of fATp. Each curve in the figure can be regarded, then, as an "isoactivation" curve for IK ATPDownloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on July 29, 2024
210 Circulation Research Vol 79, No 2 August 1996
Model of the Ventricular AP
Once the model for IK-ATP was formulated, we incorporated
it into the LR-II model described by Luo and Rudy.21
 This
mathematical model reproduces the AP of endocardial ventricular myocytes of guinea pig-type hearts with a high degree
of electrophysiological detail. It includes mathematical descriptions of 12 different ionic currents, as well as intracellular
Ca 2+
 buffering and the Ca2+-induced Ca 2 +
 release process.
The basic equation that relates Vm to ionic currents is the
following:
Normal Ionic Concentrations
(5)
dV
- ^
at
where Cm is the membrane capacitance, Istim is the stimulus
current, and ZIion is the sum of all the ionic currents that cross
the sarcolemma, namely, the fast Na+
 current (INa), the current
S 8 fl i A
(mmol/L)
1—i—i—i—I—i—
-100 -80 -60 -40 -20 0 20 40
Vm(mV)
0.1 %
0.3%
' I " ' I " ' I 1
 "
0 20 40 60 80 100120140160180 200
[ADP], (umol/L)
FIG 1. Characteristics of KATP channels considered in the model.
A, Single-channel current-voltage relationships for the KATp channel. In this figure, IK-ATP is the current through a single fully activated channel. Symbols indicate experimental values (duplicated from Fig 6A in Reference 24); solid lines are simulation
results. Each plot corresponds to a different value of [K+
]o. Intracellular concentrations of Na+
, K+
, and Mg2+
 are 8, 140, and
3.1 mmol/L, respectively. B, fATP as a function of [ATP]; and [ADP];.
Equations 4,12, and 13 were used to generate these plots. Each
curve corresponds here to a certain value of fATP (indicated in
percentage above each curve).
Ion
Na+
Ca2
-
K+
Mg2
~
Concentration, mmol/L
Intracellular
10
0.12X1CT3
145
0.5
Extracellular
140
1.8
5.4
Bulk
140
1.8
5.4
through the L-type Ca 2 +
 channels (ICa,t).* the delayed rectifier
K+
 current (IK), the inward rectifier K+
 current (IK1), the plateau K+
 current (IKp), the Na + -Ca 2 +
 exchanger current (INaca).
the Na + -K+
 pump current (INaK), a nonspecific Ca2+-activated
K+
 and Na +
 current (Ins), and the current carried by the sarcolemmal Ca 2 +
 pump (Ip(ca))- Mathematical details of this
model can be found elsewhere.21
In our simulations, extracellular ionic concentrations were
held constant, unless otherwise noted (see "Extracellular K +
Accumulation" below). Intracellular concentrations changed
dynamically as a result of ionic fluxes through the sarcolemma. The normal values of extracellular concentrations and
initial intracellular concentrations are listed in the Table. All
simulations correspond to a temperature of 37°C.
Stimulation Protocol
In each simulation, unless otherwise noted (see "Extracellular
K+
 Accumulation" below), constant values were assigned to each
relevant parameter of the model (ie, fATP and ionic concentrations), and in these conditions, the cell was stimulated with a
constant BCL. In order to achieve steady state conditions and to
avoid alternants in APD, 10 APs were elicited before recording
the data. The stimulus consisted of rectangular current pulses 2
ms in duration and an amplitude 1.5 times the diastolic threshold.
APD
We defined APD in our simulations as the interval between
the instant of maximum upstroke velocity of the AP, [dV/dt]max,
and the instant of 90% repolarization.
Calculation of JeraUx
When calculating the rate of K+
 efflux from the cell, the basic
LR-II model was slightly modified so as to achieve zero net K +
efflux under basal normoxic conditions. Specifically, the maximum current density through the Na + -K+
 pump was increased
from 1.5 to 2.61 fiA/pF, which is still in the range of measured
values.29
 This change affects AP morphology only slightly (small
decrease of APD due to accelerated repolarization).
To compute Jefllux, we started by subtracting the K+
 (inward)
current carried by the Na + -K+
 pump from the total K+
 current
(IK,T) to obtain the total outward K+
 current (IK,o)- Taking into
account the 3:2 stoichiometry of the pump, this results in
lK,o=lK,T+2INaK (where INaK is the Na + -K+
 pump current). We
then calculated the average outward current density (Iout) as the
integral mean value of IK,o- In order to compare the simulation
results with experimental data, the current density value was
translated to Jefflux (in (/mal-g^-mm'1
) using the following
expression:
600000/1 \
(o) Jefflux— ^ I — VE Cw )SvIOut
F \P I
The assumed values of the parameters in Equation 6 were p= 1
kg/L for the myocardial density, VECW=0.52 L/kg wet wt for the
*Note that the correct formulation of the term fx, which appears
in the L-type Ca2+
 current formulation, is given in the text of the
article by Luo and Rudy21
 (page 1073) and not in the list of equations
at the end of said article.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on July 29, 2024
Ferrero et al Model of the Cardiac ATP-Sensitive K+
 Current 211
extracellular water content,30
 and Sv=0.3 ^varlfjm3
 for the surface-to-volume ratio of the myocyte. F stands for the Faraday
constant. Details about derivation of Equation 6 can be found in
Appendix 2.
Finally, AJefllux was calculated as the difference between the
actual value of Jefflux and its control value (corresponding to
fATP=0%).
Extracellular K+
 Accumulation
We also carried out long simulations in which extracellular K+
accumulation was studied. In these simulations, the cell was
paced with a BCL of 800 ms, and fATp was either abruptly or
gradually increased. Extracellular concentrations were permitted
to change dynamically as a result of ionic fluxes through the
cellular membrane. A three-compartment model was assumed,
and diffusion of ions from the extracellular cleft to the bulk extracellular medium was considered. Thus, ionic concentrations in
the cleft can be described by the following equation:
A.
d[S]o
dt VECW z sF
l
 v«E
p
T
Us.total
where [S]o and [S]buik are the concentrations of the ionic species
S in the extracellular cleft and in the bulk extracellular medium,
respectively. The term zs is the valence of the ionic species S,
and Is.totai stands for the total current through the sarcolemma
carried by the ionic species S. Finally, rdiff (1 s) is the time constant associated with the diffusion of ions from the cleft to the
bulk extracellular medium.
When simulating extracellular K+
 accumulation during noflow ischemia, the diffusion term in Equation 7 was omitted (rdiff)
to account for the lack of flow.
The modified version of the Na+
-K+
 pump in the LR-II model
was also used in the simulations (see "Calculation of Jefnux"
above).
Computation Methods
Programs were written in ACSL language using Gear stiff algorithm31
 to solve the nonlinear system of differential equations
that results from the AP model. Simulations were carried out in
a SUN SparcStation 1 using double-precision variables. To ensure numerical accuracy, the maximum allowed time step was 10
fis. The maximum relative error allowed for every variable in
each iteration was 10 ~6
.
Results
In all the simulations that are presented in this section,
fATP is varied, and the effect of this variation on AP configuration, ionic currents, and K+
 efflux is investigated. A
given value of fATP can be related to [ATP]i and [ADP];
using the isoactivation curves shown in Fig IB.
Effects of KATP Channel Opening on AP
Configuration and Ionic Currents
The effects of the progressive activation of IK-ATP °n the
characteristics of the ventricular AP were first investigated
using normal nonischemic values for the ionic concentrations. The values used are listed in the Table.
Fig 2 shows the results of these simulations. In Fig 2A,
a set of APs that correspond to different values of fATP is
shown. It can be noted that AP configuration varies significantly when KATP channels become activated, even
with very low values of fArp. When fATP increases, there is
a marked reduction in APD, a moderate reduction of the
plateau potential, and a slight diastolic hyperpolarization.
Resting Vm, whose value is —86.5 mV in control
(fATP=0%) conditions, decreases almost linearly to reach
a value of -87.1 mV for fATP=2.5%. This would be in
50 i
0 -
-50-
-100 J
. 2.5%
1.0%
100 ms
0.0
C.
1
2 - i
n —u
8 -
6 "
4 -
2 -
n —
<
2.5%
zi.0%
0.6%
\ r 04%
\ y , 0.2%
XTV/ 0.1%
100 ms
FIG 2. Results of the model under conditions of normal ionic
concentrations (see Table). A, Simulated APs for different values
of fATP (numbers indicated, in percentage, for each curve). The
cell was electrically stimulated with a BCL of 800 ms. B, Normalized APD as a function of fATP for two different BCLs (475
and 800 ms). APD is normalized in each case to its control value
(184.1 ms for BCL=800 ms, and 175.2 ms for BCL=475 ms),
which corresponds to fATP=0%. C, Time course of the total K+
current crossing the sarcolemma (IK,T, calculated as the net sum
of all K+
 currents carried by sarcolemmal K+
 channels and
pumps) for different degrees of KATP channel activation. The same
BCL as in panel A was used.
accordance with the slight diastolic hyperpolarization observed by Gasser and Vaughan-Jones 1 5
 in myocytes exposed to hypoxic conditions, although other studies have
reported opposite results. 3 2
 The cell becomes completely
unexcitable for f ATP ^3.1 % for the standard stimulus used
in the simulations (not shown).
The reduction in APD caused by increasing activation
of IK-ATP is represented in Fig 2B, in which the results
corresponding to two different BCLs are compared. For
each BCL, the APD has been normalized to its maximum
value, which corresponds to the complete inactivation of
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on July 29, 2024
212 Circulation Research Vol 79, No 2 August 1996
the KATP channels. For a BCL of 800 ms, the figure shows
how the activation of ^0.6% of the total population of
channels is sufficient to account for a 50% shortening in
APD. This figure increases to »0.7% when the pacing
frequency is increased to a BCL of 475 ms.
The value of fATP needed to shorten APD to half its
control value is in accordance with several experimental
results.111314
 Moreover, the rate of change of APD with
fATp agrees very nicely with indirect experimental findings
by Nichols and Lederer.12
Activation of IK.ATP modifies the ionic sarcolemmal currents
significantly. Fig 2C shows the evolution of the total K+
 current (IKJ-) as activation of IK.ATP progresses. The total time during which the K+
 currents are flowing shortens in correspondence with the reduction in APD. Both the maximum peak of
IK,T and the amplitude of the K+
 current "plateau" increase
with fATP. The secondary peak of the K+
 current in phase 3,
mainly due to activation of the time-independent IK1, also increases, although only slightly, with fATP.
Fig 3 depicts the relative contributions of IK-ATP and the rest
of the sarcolemmal K+
 currents to IKJ-. The time courses of IK_
ATP and of the sum of all the other K+
 currents (IK.R) are compared for six different values of fATP. The shape of IK-ATP is
 a
distorted version of the AP waveform, due to the inward rectification of the KATP channels, and presents a plateau whose
level is proportional to the degree of channel activation. Regarding IK.R, both the initial peak during depolarization (due
mainly to the plateau K+
 current and to IK1) and the secondary
peak during repolarization (due basically to IKi) are practically
independent of fATP. Opening of KATP channels significantly
depresses the plateau of IKR. It is noticeable that for degrees
of KATP channel activation over 0.4%, the overall contribution
of IK-ATP to IKT is higher than the contribution of all the rest of
the K+
 currents added together.
Effects of Changes on Ionic Concentrations
In the next set of simulations, [Mg2+]j, [Na+
]i; and [K+
]o
are varied in turn while the other ionic concentrations remain at their control levels (see the Table). The effects of
changes in these concentrations, which modulate the activity of the KATP channels, on AP configuration and APD
are further investigated.
Changes in [Mg2+]t
Myoplasmic free Mg2+, which partially blocks KATp
channels in a voltage-dependent fashion, is known to increase from its control level (»0.5 mmol/L) to «2.5
mmol/L in 6 to 9 minutes of global ischemia.33
 To investigate the effects of increased intracellular Mg2+
 level on
AP configuration, we simulated APs under different KATP
channel activation degrees for three different [Mg2+]; levels. The results are shown in Fig 4. Each of the six sets of
APs plotted in Fig 4A corresponds to a fixed value of fATP.
It can be seen that increased levels of intracellular Mg2+
partially counteract the AP shortening caused by IK-ATPHigh [Mg2+]j also elevates the AP plateau level because
of the enhanced inward rectification of the KATP channels.
The relationship between normalized APD and fATP for
different [Mg2+]i levels is plotted in Fig 4B. Note that the
effect of intracellular Mg2+
 on APD is more significant at
higher values of fATp- The fraction of channels needed to
be activated to reduce APD to 50% rises from »0.6% for
[Mg2+],=0.5 mmol/L to »0.8% for [Mg2+], = 1.5 mmol/L
and «1.0% for [Mg2+];=2.5 mmol/L. The current through
KATP channels at Vm=0 mV is reduced from 80% to 46%
of the maximum possible current when [Mg2+], increases
from 0.5 to 2.5 mmol/L. According to these results, the
effect of an increased intracellular Mg2+
 level during hypoxia/ischemia has a considerable effect on APD, reducing
the KATP-mediated shortening of the AP.
Changes in [Na +]t
Next, we investigated the effects of increased levels of
intracellular Na+
. APs corresponding to different values
of [Na+
]j and different values of fATP are shown in Fig 5A.
Changes in [Na+
]; have two different effects on AP configuration. The first one is independent of KATP channels
and is due to the dependence on [Na+
]; exhibited by several ionic channels, pumps, and exchangers in the sarcolemma.21
 This direct effect tends to shorten the AP when
intracellular levels of Na+
 rise, even in the absence of KATP
channel activation. Fig 5B, which shows the dependence
of APD on fATP for three different values of [Na+
]j, illustrates this phenomenon. All APDs are referred to the value
that corresponds to fATP=0% and [Na+
]i=10 mmol/L.
Note, indeed, that for any constant value of fATp, AP shortens as [Na+
]j increases. On the other hand, as discussed
previously, intracellular Na+
 causes a partial voltage-dependent block in KATp channels. This would tend to reduce
the AP shortening caused by IK-ATP activation, as happens
with intracellular Mg2+. To further investigate this effect,
8 -
6 -
4 -
2 -
0 —
8 -
6 -
4 -
2 -
fATP = 0.1 % fAW-0.2%
100 ms
1
X
—Jv
fAW-1.0%
L. J
fATP = 0.4%
fATP = 2.5%
c >
[ ]^ —
FIG 3. Time course of K+
 currents
for different values of fA-rp- Ionic concentrations are listed in the Table.
O indicates IK.ATP; • , lKfl.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on July 29, 2024
Ferrero et al Model of the Cardiac ATP-Sensitive K+
 Current 213
A.
50 -i
B -50
-100
fATP=0.2%
50 -i
>a
-50
-100
L fATp- 1.0 1.0%%
2.5 mmol/L
5 mmol/L
0.5 mmol/L
[Mg2
*]i (mmol/L)
' ' ' I ' ' n I ' ' I ' ' ' 1
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0
fAW (%)
FIG 4. Effect of intracellular Mg2+
levels on AP configuration. A BCL
of 800 ms was used in the simulations. Ionic concentrations other
than [Mg2+]| are listed in the Table.
A, Simulated APs corresponding to
different degrees of KATP channel
activation (values of fATP are indicated above each set). The longest
of the three APs on each panel corresponds to [Mg2+]i=2.5 mmol/L;
the central one, to 1.5 mmol/L; and
the shortest one, to 0.5 mmol/L. B,
Normalized APD as a function of
fATP for three different values of
[Mg2+]i. Control value of APD
(100% level) is 184.1 ms.
we constructed Fig 5C by normalizing APD values in a
different way. Each value of APD corresponding to a
given level of intracellular Na+
 was normalized to the
maximum APD value (corresponding to fATP=0%) found
under that particular [Na+
](. In this way, the direct effect
of intracellular Na+
 previously mentioned is eliminated,
while the KATP-dependent effect is maintained and amplified. When APD values are normalized in this manner, it
can be seen (Fig 5C) that all the curves (APD versus fATP)
fall reasonably well on a single curve, with maximum differences in APD values being in the range of 5% for all
values of fATP. This means that the effect of [Na+
], on APD
mediated by KATP channels is very small in the range of
[Na+
]i tested. Note that the current through KATP channels
at Vm=0 mV is reduced from 87% to 63% of the maximum
possible current when [Na+
]j is increased from 10 to 20
mmol/L, which is much less significant than the reduction
caused by Mg2+.
Changes in [K+
]o
Increases in [K+
]o that take place in ischemic episodes
are known to profoundly affect APD. The effects of high
[K+
]o on APD are mediated in part by an increase in the
conductance of both the inward rectifier (gKi) and the delayed rectifier (gK) channels, something which tends to decrease APD. Similarly, [K+
]o is also known to affect the
conductance of KATP channels in a similar manner.22
We used the model to investigate the effect of [K+
]o
on AP configuration for different degrees of activation of
IK ATP- Fig 6 depicts the results obtained. The upper left
APs in Fig 6A correspond to complete inactivation of
IK-ATP, and it is seen, as expected, how APD reduces in
response to increases in [K+
]o. APs also exhibit diastolic
depolarization, which is due to the increase in [K+
]o. The
other five sets of APs in Fig 6A show the effects of the
progressive activation of IK-ATP on AP configuration. As
fATp increases, APD is further decreased, resting Vm is
scarcely affected, and the absolute influence of [K+
]o on
APD is reduced.
Fig 6B shows the effect of [K+
]o on the APD-fATP dependence. APD values are normalized to the reference
value corresponding to fATP=0% and [K+
]O=5.4 mmol/L.
The fraction of open KATP channels needed to produce a
50% reduction in APD is reduced from =»0.6% to 0.55%,
0.48%, and 0.38% as [K+
]o increases from 5.4 mmol/L to
7.5, 9.5, and 11.5 mmol/L, respectively.
However, if we normalize the values of APD for each
value of [K+
]o to their control value (fATP=0%) corresponding to that particular [K+
]o, the results are different.
As illustrated in Fig 6C, the relative reduction of APD
normalized in this way is independent of [K+
]o (all the
points fall reasonably well in one single curve). These
results suggest that both high [K+
]o and KATP channel
activation tend to reduce APD, but the effects of these
two factors seem to be independent of one another. Indeed, Fig 6C shows that for any value of [K+
]o in the
range of early ischemia, «0.6% of the total population
of channels, when open, always cause a 50% reduction
in APD from its control value independently of [K+
]o.
Similarly (although not shown in the figures), for a fixed
value of fATP in the range of 0% to 2.5%, APD is reduced
to 76% of its control value when [K+
]o increases from
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on July 29, 2024
214 Circulation Research Vol 79, No 2 August 1996
A.
50-,
>S
 -50
-100
50
i~ o H
>6
-50
-100 - 1
18mmol/L
15 mmo
10 mmol/L
= 0.6%
FIG 5. Effects of intracellular
Na+
 on APD. A, Simulated APs
corresponding to different degrees of KATp channel activation
(values of fATp are indicated
above each set). The longest of
the three APs on each panel corresponds to [Na+
],=10 mmol/L;
the central one, to 15 mmol/L;
and the shortest one, to 18 mmol/
L. B, Normalized APD as a function of fATP for three different values of [Na+
],. Control values of
APD for each [Na+
]i, corresponding to fATP=0%, are 184.1 ms
([Na+
]i=1u mmol/L, 100% reference value), 161.4 ms ([Na+
],=
15 mmol/L), and 132.2 ms
([Na+
]i=20 mmol/L). The cell was
stimulated with a BCL of 800 ms.
Ionic concentrations other than
[Na^]i are listed in the Table. C,
Same data as in panel B but normalized with a different criterion.
For each value of [Na+
],, the normalized APD was referred to the
corresponding control value
specified above.
o.o
5.4 to 11.5 mmol/L, independently of the value of fATp
considered.
Fig 6B can also be used to compare the separate effects
of high [K ¥]a and KATP channel activation on AP shortening. It is seen that in the range of values chosen for [K+
](,
and fATP, the effect of KATP channel activation on AP shortening under conditions of normal [K+
]o is more pronounced than that of extracellular K+
 accumulation alone.
In the absence of KATP channel activation, typical early
ischemic levels of [K+] o of 11 to 12 mmol/L16
 shorten the
APD to «75% of its control value. On the other hand,
activation of 0.6% of the total population of KATp channels,
which might be a typical value in early ischemia (see
"Discussion" and Reference 14), reduces APD to «50%
in the presence of normal K+
 levels.
Cellular K+
 Loss
It is a well-known phenomenon that cardiac myocytes
lose K+
 during metabolically impaired situations. In ischemic episodes, K+
 loss begins at —15 s after the onset
of ischemia, and net K+
 efflux rate reaches a peak value
in the range of 0.3 to 0.5 /v,mol/(g-min).416
 In substratefree hypoxia, net K+
 loss averages 0.54 to 0.60 fjmoil
(g • min).1434
 Finally, net K+
 efflux rate seems to be higher,
^0.9 /imol/(g • min) in hypoxia with glucose present.4
The model presented here can be used to quantify the
K+
 loss caused by the activation of IK ATP- For this purpose,
we simulate APs for different pacing frequencies and different [K+] o levels and quantify Jefflux and AJcfflux using
Equation 6 (see "Materials and Methods").
Fig 7A shows the magnitude of AJefflux (shown as AJT
in Fig 7) as a function of fATP for two different values of
BCL. As depicted in the figure, net increment in K+
 loss
shows a biphasic behavior with KATP channel activation.
Indeed, AJefflux initially increases with fATp, reaching a
maximum value of 0.08 /Ltmol-g^'-mkr1
 (BCL=800ms)
or 0.16 jumol-g ' -min"1
 (BCL=475 ms) for fATPof »1% .
From this point, AJefflux decreases as IK-ATP is further increased and even becomes negative for fATP >2.25%
(BCL=800 ms) or 2.75% (BCL=475 ms).
The level of extracellular K+
 modulates the rate of K+
 loss
from the cell, as demonstrated in Fig 7B, in which AJefflux is
plotted against fATP for two different values of [K+
]o. It is
noticeable how the maximum AJ,.fflux decreases when [K+
]o
increases (0.081 //mol-g^'-min"1
 for [K+
L=5.4 mmol/L,
0.044 ^mol-g- 1
 -min"1
 for [K+
]O=8.5 mmol/L). The degree
of KATP channel opening for which the maximum takes place
is also reduced (0.8% for [K+
]O=5.4 mmol/L, 0.7% for
[K+
JO=8.5 mmol/L). Thus, in ischemic situations in which
extracellular K+
 accumulation takes place, cellular K+
 loss
through the KATP channels would be even smaller.
The rate of cellular K+
 loss mediated by IK-ATP obtained
with the model is significantly lower than the values of
total K+
 efflux found experimentally. Panels C and D of
Fig 7 compare the simulation results with experimental
measures of K+
 loss in different situations.41416-
34
 In Fig
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on July 29, 2024
Ferrero et al Model of the Cardiac ATP-Sensitive K+
 Current 215
A.
50 -|
I
-100 -1
50
I 0
11.5 mmol/L'
9.5 mmol/L
7.5 mmol/L
5.4 mmol/L
>S
-50
-100 - 1
0.0 2.0
FIG 6. Effect of extracellular IC
levels on AP configuration. Ionic
concentrations other than [K+
]o
are listed in the Table. A BCL of
800 ms was used in the simulations. A, Simulated APs corresponding to different degrees of
KATp channel activation (values
of fATP are indicated above each
set). The longest of the four APs on
each panel corresponds to
[K+
]O=5.4 mmol/L; the central
ones, to 7.5 mmol/L and 9.5 mmol/
L; and the shortest one, to 11.5
mmol/L. B, Normalized APD as a
function of fATP for different values
of [K+
]o. Control values of APD for
each [K+
]o, corresponding to
fATp=0%, are 184.1 ms ([K-]O=5.4
mmol/L, 100% reference value),
165.4 ms ([K+
]O=7.5 mmol/L),
152.9 ms ([K+
]O=9.5 mmol/L), and
140.3 ms ([K+
]o=11.5 mmol/L). C,
Same data as in panel B but normalized with a different criterion.
For each value of [K+
]o, the normalized APD was referred to the
corresponding control value specified above.
7C, Jefflux, corresponding to a pacing frequency of 75 bpm
(BCL=800 ms) obtained with the model, is compared with
the experimental values obtained by Venkatesh et al34
 in
similar experimental conditions. In normoxia, both theoretical and experimental values agree nicely (1.11 versus
1.24 //mol-g^'-min"1
, respectively). However, in substrate-free hypoxia, the empirical Jetnux greatly exceeds the
maximum theoretical KATP-related Jefflux (1.79 versus 1.18
jiimol-g"1
 -min"1
, respectively).
Fig 7D compares the values of AJefflux caused by IKATP
activation, obtained with the model, with those obtained
experimentally in different conditions. For the theoretical
results, the maximum values of AJefflllx in each situation
have been chosen. The experimental values correspond to
the peak of the K+
 efflux rate during the ischemic episode.
It can be seen that, with only one exception, experimental
values of AJefflux increase with pacing frequency. The figure shows that theoretical AJefflux through KATP channels is
in the order of 5 to 7 times less than experimental values
obtained in similar conditions. Thus, IKATP activation does
not seem to quantitatively account for the entire observed
hypoxic/ischemic cellular K+
 loss. All these results will
be discussed in the next section.
Extracellular K+
 Accumulation
Many experimental studies have been published about
the time course of [K+
]o during ischemia. There is general
agreement in that, during early ischemia, [K+
]o initially
increases and then plateaus at a level of «10 to 12 mmol/
L 4.14,2030,35 rpj^ behavior ca n ^e qualitatively reproduced
by the model, as seen in Fig 8. In Fig 8A, no-flow ischemia
has been simulated by abruptly increasing fATP from 0%
to 1.0%, while preventing K+
 diffusion from the extracellular cleft to bulk extracellular medium (see "Materials
and Methods"). It can be noted from the figure that [K+
]o
is approximately constant during normoxic perfusion
(fATP=0%), because net K+
 efflux is zero in normal conditions. However, when KATP current becomes activated,
[K+
]o rises until a steady state is reached (within minutes),
when [K+
]o increases in a linear manner. This reflects the
constant value of Jrfflux in this situation (constant slope of
s=»0.13 mmol/L per second, which corresponds to a Jef^,,
of 0.075 /rniol-g-'-mirT1
).
In Fig 8B, no-flow ischemia is simulated in a more realistic manner. KATP channels are progressively (and linearly) activated from 0% to 2.5% during 10 minutes. In
this time frame, [K+
]o increases from 5.4 to 8.0 mmol/L,
reaching an approximately constant plateau.
Although the time course of [K+
]o shown in Fig 8B is
qualitatively similar to those obtained experimentally, the
values of [K+
]o reached are substantially smaller than the
measured ones. Thus, again it is shown how, according to
the model, ischemic K+
 loss through KATP channels does
not account for the total observed cellular K+
 loss.
Discussion
The extent to which activation of IK-ATP contributes to
the reduction of APD and to other electrophysiological
changes during metabolically impaired situations still remains unanswered from a quantitative point of view. We
have used a computer modeling approach to the problem
to elucidate this issue. Although computer models cannot
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on July 29, 2024
216 Circulation Research Vol 79, No 2 August 1996
A.
0.18
C.
Model
I I Experiments (Venkatesh et al)
2-
1.5 2.0 2.5 NORMOXIA HYPOXIA
B. D. 0.10 1.6 H
_p 1.4 4
• | 1.2- j
"so 1 0
 1
|
 08 1
S 0.6 -_
*f 0.4 4 <
 0.2 4
n n -
• Total A JT (experiments)
H Contribution of IK.A1P to A JT
500
667X
800 T
22m
f
1 200
gooj
(model)
500
—i "T
Tl
2.5 (a) (b) (c) (d) (e)
HYPOXIA
(f) (g) (d) (e)
ISCHEMIA
FIG 7. Model predictions regarding cellular K+
 loss related to KATP
channel activation. A, Net increment in K+
 efflux rate (AJT) vs fATP
for two values of BCL (indicated
beside each curve) and normal
ionic concentrations. B, Comparison between AJT values for two
different extracellular K+
 levels
(values of [K+
]o indicated beside
each curve). BCL was 800 ms. C,
Unidirectional K+
 efflux rates (JT)
in normally perfused conditions
and in substrate-free hypoxia
taken from Reference 34 compared with model results. In the
simulations, "normoxia" corresponds to an fATP of 0%, and
"hypoxia" corresponds to an fATP
of 0.9%, which yields the maximum value of JT. Ionic concentrations are those given in the
Table. Both in simulations and in
experiments, BCL was 800 ms. D,
Values of AJT corresponding to
different experimental results in
hypoxic and ischemic situations
compared with model results regarding the KATP-related K+
 loss.
Numbers over each bar indicate
the value (in milliseconds) of the
BCL used in the simulation experiment. In simulation results,
fATp yielding the maximum AJT
was considered. In experimental
ischemic results, the peak value
of AJT in the ischemic period
is represented. The abscissa is
labeled as follows: a, simulation (fATp=0.9%, normal ionic
concentrations); b, simulation
(fATP=1.0%, normal ionic concentrations); c, data from Reference
34; d, data from Reference 14; e,
data from Reference 4; f, simulation (fATP=0.7%, normal ionic concentrations except for [K+
]O=8.5
mmol/L); and g, data from Reference 16.
provide real data, they can be used to make predictions
and, in this case, can help us to understand the role of
KATp channels in hypoxia-ischemia from a theoretical
point of view.
The cardiac action potential model described by Luo
and Rudy,21
 which has been used in the present study, is
based on very recent patch-clamp data and reproduces
membrane dynamics with a great degree of electrophysiological detail. The inclusion of a new formulation of the
KATP current in this model makes it possible to simulate
metabolically impaired situations more comprehensively.
Model of IK-ATP
In its original form, the LR-II action potential model21
does not include a mathematical description of IK-ATP- The
first goal of the present study was to formulate a comprehensive model for this current. Our description of IK-ATP is
based on published experimental data regarding the main
characteristics of the current.14-
17-
22-
23
 We have integrated
the available data regarding IK_ATp dependencies on [K+
]o,
[Na+
]j, [Mg2+]l; [ATP]j, and [ADP]; in a single set of equations. The model of IK.ATP finally formulated satisfactorily
reproduces the main electrical features of KATP channels
(eg, see Fig 1A and compare with Fig 6A of Reference
24). Other factors not considered in the model have been
ignored because of their presumed lack of a physiological
role during the early phase of hypoxia/ischemia (eg, rundown of the channel24), lack of enough data to formulate
a reliable model (eg, dependence on pH;25>3M7
 and on other
nucleotides25'
38
 and effects of [Mg2+] on the fraction of
open channels39), or lack of agreement between different
authors (eg, dependence on lactate2540). It is to be noted
that the effects of some of these factors, particularly the
effects of acidosis, could be of considerable importance in
hypoxic/ischemic situations.
To our knowledge, only a few authors have incorporated
a model of IK.ATP in an AP model and used it to study the
effect of IK-ATP activation in cardiac myocytes. Nichols and
Lederer'2
 incorporated a formulation of I K A TP into the
model of rat ventricular AP described by Noble.41
 This
formulation included only the dependence on [ATP]b although the dependence on [ADP]; was implicitly considered. More recently, the incorporation of a model of IK.ATP
that considered dependencies on both [ATP]j and [K+] o to
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on July 29, 2024
Ferrero et al Model of the Cardiac ATP-Sensitive K+
 Current 217
B.
si
0-2.5% (linear)
FIG 8. Simulated time course of [K+
]o after opening of KATP channels. Values of fATP during time are represented below each plot.
A, Time course of [K+
]o after an abrupt opening of KATP channels
(fATp=1.0%). B, Time course of [K+
]o after a linear increase of fATP
from 0% to 2.5%. Note the different time scales in both panels.
an AP model has been reported.42
 In a different context,
Cook et al10
 used a simple computer model to explain the
spare-channel hypothesis for beta pancreatic cells. Our description of IK-ATP is more comprehensive than these previous attempts, because it considers dependencies on intracellular ionic concentrations and intracellular ADP as
well as on [K+
]o and [ATP];.
The model used in the present study has several limitations. In its present form, it cannot be used to simulate
true ischemia, for it lacks a description of other important
ischemia-related phenomena apart from IK-ATP activation.
Among them, the most important one might be the influence of acidosis on ionic currents. Also, intracellular ATP
decline, free Mg2+
 rise, and catecholamine release are
known to affect other ionic currents, and this should also
be considered in a more complete model. Specifically, a
more detailed model of the Na+
-K+
 pump would be desirable to determine net K+
 efflux during metabolic inhibition with more accuracy. In its present version, the pump
current dependencies on both [Na+
]; and [K+
]o are considered,21
 but the model lacks a description of its dependence
on ATP and other metabolically related parameters. The
influence of [Mg2+]; on APD through inward Ca2+
 channels43
 should also be considered. Finally, other pathophysiologically activated currents (such as the Na+
-activated
K+
 current and the free fatty acid-activated K+
 current)
also deserve some attention.
Effect of I KATP on APD
The theoretical results obtained with our model are in
excellent agreement with the spare-channel hypothesis that
was proposed by Cook et al10
 for pancreatic cells and was
later extended to cardiac cells, according to which only a
very small fraction of the total population of KATP channels
in a myocyte needs to be activated to account for the major
electrophysiological changes observed in metabolic impairment. Indeed, according to our model, activation of
< 1 % of the total number of KATP channels accounts for a
50% reduction in APD in all situations simulated. The
value of =0.6% obtained for normal ionic concentrations
correlates well with the values obtained experimentally using indirect methods, namely, 1%," 0.7%,13
 and 0.41%.14
The degree of KATP channel activation needed to account for a 50% reduction in APD might be easily
achieved in early hypoxic and ischemic situations. For example, Weiss et al14
 reported nucleotide levels of
[ATP],=4.3 mmol/L and [ADP],=95 /xmol/L after 10
minutes of substrate-free hypoxia. This would correspond,
according to Fig IB, to fATp=0.68%. In the same experimental study, 10 minutes of ischemia reduced intracellular
ATP to 4.6 mmol/L and increased free cytosolic ADP to
63 to 99 /xmol/L, which would yield a value between
0.57% and 0.63% for fATP. Thus, it is seen that even if
intracellular ATP levels fall only modestly during early
hypoxia/ischemia, activation of KATP channels may account for drastic reductions in APD. It is clear that the rise
in free cytosolic ADP levels is a key factor to quantitatively explain the APD reduction. Indeed, if [ADP]j was
held constant, fATP would reach a hypoxic/ischemic value
of only =0.2%, which is far less than the 0.6% needed to
reduce APD to half its control value.
Our results also indicate that the fraction of open KATP
channels that exist during normal perfusion causes some
degree of "baseline" shortening in the AP, which would
theoretically be reversed by applying a perfect KATP channel blocker. Indeed, using the normoxic values of intracellular ATP and ADP (6.8 mmol/L and 15 /xmol/L, respectively) reported by Weiss et al,14
 the normal value of
fATP would be 0.11%. According to Fig 2B, this would
cause a reduction in APD to =88% to 91 % of the value it
would have in the complete absence of IK-ATP- This result
is in agreement with one experimental report44
 but contradicts others regarding the inefficiency of sulfonylureas to
prolong APD in normally perfused myocytes.1734
 If we
consider a new reference value for APD that corresponds
to fATP=0.11%, then the fraction of open channels needed
to be activated to reduce APD to 50% of its normal value
would now be =0.7% instead of 0.6%.
Regarding the influence of intracellular cations on the
AP shortening caused by IK-ATP, the results of our model
show that pathophysiological levels of Mg2+
 exert a strong
influence on APD, whereas the direct (KATP-related) effect
of Na+
 is much less noticeable. Intracellular free Mg2+
 is
known to rise in early ischemia,33
 and this would reduce
the KATP-mediated effects of ATP depletion on APD (Fig
4). However, high levels of intracellular Mg2+
 are known
to significantly shorten APD by reducing Ca2+
 inward
currents.43
 Thus, elevated free [Mg2+]; would have at
least two opposite effects on APD, with KATP-dependent
effects partially counteracting Ca2+
 current-dependent
APD shortening.
As for the reduction of APD caused by increased Na+
levels (Fig 5B), it is mainly due to an enhanced activity of
the Na+
-K+
 pump as a response to high [Na+
];, being practically independent of KATP channel activity. This effect is
not likely to be physiologically significant: the extent to
which [Na+
]i increases during early ischemia is not unanimously established,20
 and whether the activity of the electrogenic Na+
-K+
 pump is enhanced or depressed during
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on July 29, 2024
218 Circulation Research Vol 79, No 2 August 1996
the first phase of ischemia and hypoxia is still not completely determined.20
Effects of IK-ATP Activation and High [K+
]o in
Ischemic AP Shortening
The question of the contribution of high extracellular
K+
 and of KATp channel activation to AP shortening is still
being debated. Although it is generally accepted that IK.ATP
activation is the key factor in ischemic APD reduction,"15
experimental evidence exists that questions this hypothesis.4
-
7
'
9
 According to a recent report by Yan et al,4
 ischemic
AP shortening would be due to high [K+
]o, and the role of
IK-ATP in this matter would be irrelevant because KATP channels would not become activated at all. The reduction of
APD following extracellular K+
 accumulation is due to the
[K+
]0-dependent change of the current-voltage relation. Indeed, elevated levels of [K+
]o produce an increase in both
the delayed rectifier current (IK) and the inward rectifier
current (IK1) because their conductance increases with [K+
]o
according to a square-root law21
 and rectification is partially
relieved. This elevation in outward current accelerates repolarization, thus leading to a shortening in APD.
The results of Yan et al,4
 however, show that hypoxia
with high [K+
]o produces an additional shortening of the
AP that is not due to high [K+
]o only (see Fig 7 of Reference
4). This result has also been obtained in another experimental study.45
 According to our theoretical results, a very
low degree of KATP channel activation may easily account
for this additional APD reduction. Indeed, both high [K+
]o
and IK.ATP activation cooperate to shorten AP (see Fig 6). In
the complete absence of IK-ATP activation, the Luo-Rudy
model21
 predicts a reduction of relative APD from 100% to
71% when [K+
]o rises from 4.0 to 10.3 mmol/L, which is
in very good agreement with the value reported by Yan.
Given this [K+
]o, <0.2% of the total population of KATP
channels would need to open to account for the additional
APD reduction (58%) observed by Yan. This degree of activation would in turn be achieved even with very modest
variations in intracellular nucleotide concentrations.
In another study, Kodama et al45
 observed that the reduction in APD caused by substrate-free hypoxia with a
high [K+
]o was similar to that obtained under normal
[K+
]o. If the data of their Table 1 regarding APD at 80%
repolarization are normalized in the same manner as in Fig
6C, it can be deduced that the normalized APD values for
different [K+
]o for 10 and 15 minutes of hypoxia are practically independent of the value of [K+
]o. Our results illustrated in Fig 6C are in agreement with this observation.
Moreover, their results regarding APD reduction in different degrees of hyperkalemia under normoxic and hypoxic conditions (see their Table 1) nicely agree with the
results of our model (partially depicted in Fig 6B), suggesting that the hypoxia-related AP shortening is mainly
due to the activation of IK-ATPIschemic K+
 Loss and Extracellular
K+
 Accumulation
Our results support the idea that KATP channel activation
does not fully account for the observed cellular K+
 loss
during hypoxia/ischemia. The model predicts the existence
of a net increment in Jrfflllx in hypoxia/ischemia, but its
magnitude is significantly lower than that observed experimentally (Fig 7C and 7D). Qualitatively, though, our
model predicts the well-known plateau of [K+
]o during the
early phase of ischemia (see Fig 8B). According to our
results, this plateau is reached because of the biphasic behavior of Ajefflux (Fig 7A and 7B). Initially, activation of
KATP channel causes an increase in AJefflux, but after a certain value of f ATP is reached, this trend changes and A Jefflux
declines until it reaches zero value. This would cause a
stabilization of [K+
]o, as shown in Fig 8B.
However, our simulations show that the fraction of the
total K+
 loss attributable to IK.ATP would be in the range
of 1/5 (Fig 7D), and so other mechanisms must account
for the bulk of the observed K+
 loss. Other possible mechanisms of K+
 loss include changes in other currents during
metabolic impairment, activation of other K+
 channels
during ischemia (such as the Na+
-activated K+
 channel),
cotransport of lactate or Cl~ anions, or extracellular space
shrinkage, among others (see Reference 20 for a review).
The results obtained with the model are in partial disagreement with one experimental result, which suggests
that a degree of KATP channel activation of <0.5% would
account for the observed hypoxic/ischemic K+
 loss.14
However, the model predictions dealing with the participation of IK-ATP in ischemic K+
 loss agree nicely with other
reported experimental values regarding the partial prevention of K+
 loss in ischemia by glibenclamide. For example,
the data from Hicks and Cobbe46
 indicate that the glibenclamide-prevented extracellular K+
 accumulation during
30 minutes of global ischemia in rabbit septum reached
4.1 mmol/L, a value equivalent to an average AJefflux of
0.071 //mol-g"1
 -min"1
 (using the value VECW=0.52 L/kg
wet wt reported by Weiss et al30), which is in the range of
values predicted by our model (see Fig 7D). In a study by
Yan et al,4
 glibenclamide reduced K+
 efflux from 4.51 to
3.47 ^mol/g wet wt in a 15-minute period of hypoxia with
high [K+
]o. This yields a value of 0.069 /anol-g~1
-min~i
for the average AJefflux due to the glibenclamide-blocked
currents (mainly IK-ATP), which is again in accordance with
the predictions of the model.
Sensitivity of the Results to Model Parameters
One important issue regarding computer models that
must always be taken into consideration is the sensitivity
of the results to the values of the model parameters. In the
model of IK-ATP presented here, parameters are, in general,
well matched to experimental measurements. The parameter that shows the greatest dispersion when measured experimentally is the [ATP] of half-maximum inhibition of
the channel (Km in Equation 4).14'
26
 However, its value
does not influence our conclusions because the results are
presented in terms of fATP.
Another parameter that could have influence in the quantitative results, because it multiplies fATP in Equation 1, is the
KATP channel density (<r). The value chosen (3.8 channels/
lira2
, derived from Reference 14) lies in the middle of the
range of reported values for guinea pig ventricular myocytes.
Figures as low as 0.55 channel//xm2
 have been reported,47
and if this value were to be adopted, all the results regarding
the value of fATP should be multiplied by a factor of 7, so the
results of the present study would be compromised. However, all subsequent estimates of the parameter a yielded
considerably higher values. If the estimate of Nichols et al13
(^5 channels//um2
, which is the highest value reported for
guinea pig cardiac cells) is taken into consideration, the values of fATp given in the present study would actually be 1.3
times smaller (eg, fATp needed for a 50% reduction in APD
would now be 0.45%). Thus, all qualitative results would still
withstand this examination.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on July 29, 2024
Ferrero et al Model of the Cardiac ATP-Sensitive K+
 Current 219
As for the values obtained for K+
 efflux, Equation 6
shows that the results are critically dependent on the chosen VECW, which has a rather uncertain value. The value
chosen for VECW (0.52 L/kg wet wt) is typical for rabbit
septa.30
 Values as low as 0.2 have been reported for other
animal species. If this value of 0.2 L/kg wet wt was
adopted, the results obtained regarding K+
 efflux rates
would have been 66% higher. Even in this extreme case,
the simulated values of AJefflux would still be on the order
of 3 to 4 times lower than the reported experimental
results.
Appendix 1: Formulation of IK-ATP
General Equation
The general equation that describes the total current density
through the KATp channels is the following:
where a is the channel density, g0 is the unitary conductance, p0
is the maximum channel open probability (in the absence of
ATP), fATP is the fraction of open KATP channels, Vm is membrane
potential, and EK-ATP is the reversal potential.
The value chosen for the channel density was <r=3.8 channels/
jjm2
, and po was fixed at a value of 0.91.
Unitary Conductance
The expression for the conductance of a single fully open channel is as follows:
(9) go=yofMfNfT
The term y0 is the unitary conductance in the absence of intracellular Na+
 and Mg2+
 and depends on [K+
]o:
(10) yo=35.375 [K+
]o
5.4
where y0 is obtained in pS ([K+
]o in mmol/L).
The term fM in Equation 9 accounts for inward rectification
caused by intracellular Mg2+
 ions and is formulated by means of
a Hill equation:
(11) 1M—~
1
1 , [Mg2+],
^h.Mg
where the half-maximum saturation constant (KhMg) depends on
membrane potential and on [K + ] o :
(12)
with the value of the electrical distance (6Mg) being 0.32. F is the
Faraday constant, R is the gas constant, and T is the absolute
temperature. The factor K°hMll is given by the following:
(13) KhMg(
(both K\Me and [K+
]o in mmol/L).
The term fN in Equation 9 accounts for inward rectification
caused by intracellular Na+
 ions and is again formulated by
means of a Hill equation:
(14)
1
1 +
Na+
]
where the value of the half-maximum saturation constant (Kh_m)
depends on membrane voltage:
(15)
The value adopted for electrical distance (<5Na) is 0.35, whereas
AT\Na is 25.9 mmol/L.
Finally, the temperature (T) effect was introduced in Equation
9 according to the following expression:
(ID) IT(1)~V10
where Qlo, T, and To indicate temperature coefficient, absolute
temperature, and reference temperature, respectively, with
Q1()=1.3 and T0=36°C.
Fraction of Activated KATP Channels
In the model, the term fATp in Equation 8 depends on concentrations of intracellular ATP and of free cytosolic ADP, according
to the following expression:
(17)
1
l+([ATPy/CJH
where both the maximum-inhibition constant (Km) and the Hill
coefficient (H) depend on [ADP];. The equations that express
these dependencies are as follows:
(18) £m=35.8+17.9[ADP]i0256
(with Km in ^mol/L and [ADP]j in ^mol/L) and
(19) H=1.3+0.74exp(-0.09[ADP]i)
(with [ADP], in ^mol/L).
Reversal Potential
The reversal potential of the KATP channel (EK,ATP) is equal to the
equilibrium potential for K+
 and is thus given by the Nernst equation:
(20) RT
l
Appendix 2: Calculation of K+
 Efflux
Calculation of the Average K+
 Outward
Current Density
The total instantaneous K+
 current density (IK,T) through the
membrane is the sum of all the sarcolemmal currents carried by
K+
 ions. In the LR-II model, this is expressed as follows:
(21) lKT = IcaK+lK + lKI+lKp~2INaK-t~InsK + lK-ATP
Subtracting the inward current carried by the Na+
-K+
 pump from
the total K+
 current, we obtain the total outward K+
 current (IK,O)
:
The average outward current density (Iolll) was then calculated
as the integral mean value of IKiO:
(23) I, i r
lut~BCL Jn
Iicodt
Derivation of Equation 6
The K+
 efflux rate (JemUx) can be defined as the number of
moles of K+
 leaving the cell (noin) per unit time (At) and unit
tissue weight (Am):
(24) J efflux — . . .
AtAm
The number of moles of nou, can be related to the electric
charge carried by K+
 ions leaving the cell (Ql1ut) by means of the
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on July 29, 2024
220 Circulation Research Vol 79, No 2 August 1996
Faraday constant (nou,=Qoul/F). Along with this, Qollt is related to
the average K+
 outward current density (Iout) as
(25) Qou.=Iou.AmAt
where Am is the total membrane area of all the myocytes contained in the tissue of unit mass Am.
Rearranging the equations, we obtain the following:
(26) T -
J
 efflux FAm
Now the total membrane area (Am) can be related to the total
cell volume (Vcci) by means of the surface-to-volume ratio of
the myocyte (Sv): Am = Vce,-Sv. Moreover, Vce, can be expressed as the difference between the total tissue volume (Vt)
and the volume occupied by the extracellular water (Ve). Thus,
we obtain the following:
The term Am/V, in the previous equation is the tissue density
(p), and the term Ve/Am is the extracellular water content per
unit weight (VECw)- This yields the following:
(28)
Sv ( ~l
I o ut
Finally, if we want to express Jefflux in ^mol • g ' • min ' while
having Sv in ^m2
//im3
, F in coulomb/mol, p in g/crn3
, VFCW in
mL/g, and Iom in ^tA/cm2
, then a unit conversion factor of 600 000
is needed in Equation 25. The resultant equation is identical to
Equation 6 in the text.
Acknowledgments
This study was supported in part by the Conselleria de Educacion y Ciencia de la Generalitat Valenciana (Programa de Formacidn, Perfeccionamiento y Movilidad de Profesores e Investigadores 94/4158). The authors would like to thank Dr Vicente
Lopez Merino for helpful discussions.
References
I. Trautwein W, Gottstein U, Dudel J. Der aktionsstrom der myokardfaser im sauerstoffmangel. Pflugers Arch. 1954;260:40-60.
2. Wit AL, Janse MJ. The Ventricular Arrhythmias of Ischemia and
Infarction: Etectrophysiological Mechanisms. New York, NY: Futura Publishing Co Inc; 1993:86-87/207-208.
3. Morena H, Janse MJ, Fiolet JWT, Krieger WJG, Crijns H, Durrer D.
Comparison of the effects of regional ischemia, hypoxia, hyperkalemia and acidosis on intracellular and extracellular potentials and
metabolism in the isolated porcine heart. Circ Res. 1980;46:634-646.
4. Yan G-X, Yamada KA, Kleber AG, McHowat J, Corr PB. Dissociation between cellular K+
 loss, reduction in repolarization time, and
tissue ATP levels during myocardial hypoxia and ischemia. Circ Res.
1993;72:560-570.
5. Vleugels A, Vereecke J, Carmeliet E. Ionic currents during hypoxia in
voltage-clamped cat ventricular muscle. Circ Res. 1980:47:501-508.
6. Noma A. ATP-regulated K channels in cardiac muscle. Nature.
1983:305:147-148.
7. Elliot AC, Smith GL, Allen DG. Simultaneous measurements of action potential duration and intracellular ATP in isolated ferret hearts
exposed to cyanide. Circ Res. 1989:64:583-591.
8. De Lorenzi F, Cai S, Schanne OF, Ruiz-Petrich E. Partial contribution
of the ATP-sensitive K+
 current to the effects of mild metabolic depression in rabbit myocardium. Mol Cell Biochem. 1994:132:133-143.
9. Nakaya H, Takeda Y, Tohse N, Kanno M. Effects of ATP-sensitive
K+
 channel blockers on the action potential shortening in hypoxic
and ischaemic myocardium. Br J Pharmacol. 1991;103:1019-1026.
10. Cook DL, Satin LS, Ashford U, Hales N. ATP-sensitive K+
 channels
in pancreatic J-cells: spare-channel hypothesis. Diabetes. 1988:37:
495-498.
11. Faivre JF, Findlay I. Action potential duration and activation of ATPsensitive K+
 current in isolated guinea-pig ventricular myocytes.
Biochim Biophys Acta. 1990:1029:167-172.
12. Nichols CG, Lederer WJ. The regulation of ATP-sensitive K+
 channel activity in intact and permeabilized rat ventricular myocytes. J
Physiol (Lond). 1990;423:91-110.
13. Nichols CG, Ripoll C, Lederer WJ. ATP-sensitive potassium channel
modulation of the guinea pig ventricular action potential and contraction. Circ Res. 1991:68:280-287.
14. Weiss JN, Venkatesh N, Lamp ST. ATP-sensitive K+
 channels and
cellular K+
 loss in hypoxic and ischaemic mammalian ventricle. J
Physiol (Lond). 1992;447:649-673.
15. Gasser RNA, Vaughan-Jones RD. Mechanism of potassium efflux
and action potential shortening during ischaemia in isolated mammalian cardiac muscle. J Physiol (Lond). 1990;431:713-741.
16. Kantor PF, Coetzee WA, Carmeliet EE, Dennis SC, Opie LH. Reduction of ischemic K+
 loss and arrhythmias in rat hearts: effect of
glibenclamide, a sulfonylurea. Circ Res. 1990:66:478-485.
17. Wilde AAM, Escande D, Schumacher CA, Thuringer D, Mestre M,
Fiolet JWT, Janse MJ. Potassium accumulation in the globally ischemic mammalian heart: a role for the ATP-sensitive potassium
channel. Circ Res. 1990;67:835-843.
18. Vanheel G, De Hemptinne A. Influence of KAn> channel modulation
on net potassium efflux from ischaemic mammalian cardiac tissue.
Cardiovasc Res. 1992;26:1030-1039.
19. Wilde AAM, Schumacher C, Fiolet J, Opthof T, Janse MJ. Mere
opening of KATP channels does not contribute to accumulation of K+
in the globally ischemic rabbit heart. / Mol Cell Cardiol. 1992;
24(suppl I):S276. Abstract.
20. Wilde AAM, Aksnes G. Myocardial potassium loss and cell depolarisation in ischaemia and hypoxia. Cardiovasc Res. 1995:29:1-15.
21. Luo C-H, Rudy Y. A dynamic model of the cardiac ventricular action
potential, I: simulations of ionic currents and concentration changes.
Circ Res. 1994;74:1071-1096.
22. Kakei M, Noma A, Shibasaki T. Properties of adenosine-triphosphate-regulated potassium channels in guinea-pig ventricular cells. J
Physiol (Lond). 1985:363:441-462.
23. Horie M, Irisawa H, Noma A. Voltage-dependent magnesium block
of adenosine-triphosphate-sensitive potassium channel in guinea-pig
ventricular cells. J Physiol (Lond). 1987;387:251-272.
24. Trube G, Hescheler J. Inward-rectifying channels in isolated patches
of heart cell membrane: ATP-dependence and comparison with cellattached patches. Pflugers Arch. 1984;401:178-184.
25. Lederer WJ, Nichols CG. Nucleotide modulation of the activity of
rat heart ATP-sensitive K+
 channels in isolated membrane patches.
J Physiol (Lond). 1989:419:193-211.
26. Findlay I, Faivre JF. ATP-sensitive K channels in heart muscle: spare
channels. FEBS Lett. 1991;279:95-97.
27. Terzic A, Tung RT, Kurachi Y. Nucleotide regulation of ATP sensitive potassium channels. Cardiovasc Res. 1994:28:746-753.
28. Findlay I. Effects of ADP upon the ATP-sensitive K+
 channel in rat
ventricular myocytes. J Memhr Biol. 1988:101:83-92.
29. Mogul DJ, Singer DH, Ten Eick RE. Dependence of Na-K pump
current on internal Na in mammalian cardiac myocytes. Am J Physiol.
1990;259:H488-H496.
30. Weiss JN, Lamp ST, Shine Kl. Cellular K' loss and anion efflux
during myocardial ischemia and metabolic inhibition. Am J Physiol.
1989;256:H1165-H1175.
31. Gear CW. The automatic integration of stiff ordinary differential
equations. In: Morrel AJH, ed. Information Processing. Amsterdam,
Netherlands: North Holland; 1969.
32. Lederer WJ, Nichols CG, Smith GL. The mechanism of early contractive failure of isolated rat ventricular myocytes subjected to complete metabolic inhibition. / Physiol (Lond). 1989;413:329-349.
33. Borchgrevink PC, Bergan AS, Bakoy OE, Jynge P. Magnesium and
reperfusion of ischemic rat heart as assessed by 3'P-NMR. Am J Physiol. 1989;256:H195-H204.
34. Venkatesh N, Lamp ST, Weiss JN. Sulfonylureas, ATP-sensitive K+
channels, and cellular K+
 loss during hypoxia, ischemia, and metabolic inhibition in mammalian ventricle. Circ Res. 1991 ;69:623-637.
35. Kleber AG. Extracellular potassium accumulation in acute myocardial ischemia. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 1984;16:389-394.
36. Fan Z, Makielski JC. Intracellular H + and Ca+
 modulation of trypsinmodified ATP-sensitive K+
 channels in rabbit ventricular myocytes.
Circ Res. 1993;72:715-722.
37. Fan Z, Furukawa T, Sawanobori T, Makielski JC, Hiraoka M. Cytoplasmic acidosis induces multiple conductance states in ATP-sensitive potassium channels of cardiac myocytes. J Membr Biol. 1993;
136:169-179.
38. Terzic A, Findlay I, Hosoya Y, Kurachi Y. Dualistic behaviour of
ATP-sensitive K+
 channels toward intracellular nucleoside diphosphates. Neuron. 1994;12:1049-1058.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on July 29, 2024
Ferrero et al Model of the Cardiac ATP-Sensitive K + Current 221
39. Findlay I. ATP-sensitive K+
 channels in rat ventricular myocytes are
blocked and inactivated by internal divalent cations. Pflugers Arch.
1987;410:313-320.
40. Keung EC, Li Q. Lactate activates ATP-sensitive potassium channels
in guinea pig ventricular myocytes. 3 Clin Invest. 1991;88:1772-
1777.
41. Noble D. Oxsoft Heart Program Manual (Version 2.1'). Oxford, UK:
OXSOFTLtd; 1988.
42. Shaw R, Rudy Y. Electrophysiological changes of ventricular tissue
under ischemic conditions: a simulation study. Comp Cardiol. 1994;
16:641-644.
43. Agus ZS, Kelepouris E, Dukes I, Morad M. Cytosolic magnesium
modulates calcium channel activity in mammalian ventricular cells.
Am J Pkysiol. 1989;256:C452-C455.
44. Faivre JF, Findlay I. Effects of tolbutamide, glibenclamide and diazoxide upon action potentials recorded from rat ventricular muscle.
Biochim Biophys Ada. 1989;984:l-5.
45. Kodama I, Wilde AAM, Janse MJ, Durrer D, Yamada K. Combined
effects of hypoxia, hyperkalemia and acidosis on membrane action
potential and excitability of guinea-pig ventricular muscle. J Mol Cell
Cardiol 1984,16:247-259.
46. Hicks MN, Cobbe SM. Effect of glibenclamide on extracellular potassium accumulation and the electrophysiological changes during
myocardial ischaemia in the arterially perfused interventricular septum of rabbit. Cardiovasc Res. 1991:25:407-413.
47. Noma A, Shibasaki T. Membrane current through adenosine-triphosphate-regulated potassium channels in guinea-pig ventricular cells. J
Physiol (Lond). 1985;363:463-480.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on July 29, 2024


208
Simulation of Action Potentials From
Metabolically Impaired Cardiac Myocytes
Role of ATP-Sensitive K+
 Current
Jose M. Ferrero, Jr, Javier Saiz, Jose M. Ferrero, Nitish V. Thakor
Abstract The role of the ATP-sensitive K+
 current (IK-ATP)
and its contribution to electrophysiological changes that occur
during metabolic impairment in cardiac ventricular myocytes is
still being discussed. The aim of this work was to quantitatively
study this issue by using computer modeling. A model of IK_ATP
is formulated and incorporated into the Luo-Rudy ionic model of
the ventricular action potential. Action potentials under different
degrees of activation of IK-ATP are simulated. Our results show
that in normal ionic concentrations, only »0.6% of the KATP
channels, when open, should account for a 50% reduction in action potential duration. However, increased levels of intracellular
Mg2+
 counteract this shortening. Under conditions of high [K+
]o,
such as those found in early ischemia, the activation of only
=0.4% of the KATP channels could account for a 50% reduction
I
t is well known that myocardial hypoxia and ischemia
cause profound changes in the electrophysiological
properties of cardiac tissue. One of the major
changes that occur in ventricular muscle cells during
metabolic impairment is shortening of the AP.' The reduction of APD initially causes a shortening of the refractory period,2
 and this can facilitate the appearance of
reentrant-type arrhythmias.2
 The reduction of APD during ischemia can partly be explained by an increased
[K+
]O,
3
'
4
 but additional factors seem to be involved in AP
shortening. Indeed, during hypoxic perfusion, the AP is
known to shorten in the absence of extracellular K+
accumulation.l>5
Since KATP channels were first described by Noma,6
their contribution to the shortening of the AP during hypoxia and ischemia and to other electrophysiological
changes has been debated and is still not completely clarified. The major argument against the role of the KATp
channels during early ischemia is that the value of [ATP]j
needed to open 50% of the channels is two orders of
magnitude below the measured [ATP]i bulk level in the
first phase of ischemia.7
 Thus, the fraction of channels
activated during early ischemia is likely to be very low,
and from this point of view, the current carried by KATp
channels (IK-ATP) might not seem to contribute signifiReceived November 27, 1995; accepted May 10, 1996. From the Laboratorio Integrado de B»oingenieria (J.M.F. Jr, J.S., J.M.F.), Departamento de Ingeniena Electronica, Universidad Poli- tecnica de Valencia, Valencia, Spain, and the Department of Bio- medical Engineering (J.M.F. Jr, J.S., N.V.T.), The Johns Hopkins Ur. ersity, Baltimore, Md.
Reprint requests to Dr Jose Maiia Ferrero, Jr, Laboratorio Integrado de Bioingenieria, Universidad Politecnica de Valencia, Camino de Vera s/n, 46020 Valencia, Spain. E-mail cferrero@pleiades.upv.es.
© 1996 American Heart Association, Inc.
in action potential duration. Thus, our results suggest that opening
of IK-ATP channels should play a significant role in action potential
shortening during hypoxic/ischemic episodes, with the fraction
of open channels involved being very low (<1%). However, the
results of the model suggest that activation of IK-ATP alone does
not quantitatively account for the observed K+
 efflux in metabolically impaired cardiac myocytes. Mechanisms other than
KATP channel activation should be responsible for a significant
part of the K+
 efflux measured in hypoxic/ischemic situations.
(Circ Res. 1996;79:208-221.)
Key Words • computer model • ATP-regulated channels
• myocardial ischemia • action potential shortening • K+
efflux
cantly to the AP shortening and other ischemia-related
electrophysiological changes.4
'
7
 Moreover, because IKATP
channel blockers, such as glibenclamide, only partially
prevent hypoxic/ischemic AP shortening, it has been suggested that currents other than IK.ATp must significantly
contribute to APD reduction.89
On the other hand, it has also been suggested that only
a small number of KATp channels need to be activated to
account for the changes observed in AP configuration.
Following this "spare-channel hypothesis" suggested by
Cook et al,10
 several investigators have found indirect
experimental evidence that supports this idea in the case
of cardiac myocytes.11"
14
 However, because of the difficulty of experimentally measuring the fraction of open
KATP channels directly, there is still no direct proof of this
hypothesis, and the quantitative importance of IK-ATP
channel opening in hypoxic/ischemic episodes is not yet
completely established.
The contribution of IK-ATP to cellular K+
 loss during
hypoxic/ischemic situations is not clear either. There exists experimental evidence that supports the idea that IK-ATP
channel activation largelyl415
 or partially1617
 accounts for
K+
 loss from the cell in the first minutes of a hypoxic/
ischemic episode. However, the ineffectiveness of K+
channel openers to enhance the rate of K+
 loss1819
 and
the dissociation between K+
 efflux, AP shortening, and
intracellular ATP levels in hypoxia/ischemia,4
 among
others,20
 are reasons against a major role of IK ATP in this
phenomenon.
The main gc )1 of the present study was to use a computer model to quantitatively study the influence of IK-ATP
on changes in AP configuration and cellular K+
 loss in
metabolically impaired conditions. For this purpose, we
have formulated a detailed model of this current and have
incorporated it into the LR-II model21
 of the guinea pigDownloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on July 29, 2024
Ferrero et al Model of the Cardiac ATP-Sensitive K+
 Current 209
Selected Abbreviations and Acronyms
AP = action potential
APD = AP duration
BCL = basic cycle length
fATP = fraction of open KATP channels
IK.O = total outward K+
 current
•K,T = total K+
 current
IK-ATP = ATP-sensitive K+
 current
IKR = sum of K+
 currents not including IKATP
IKI = inward rectifier K+
 current
Jetdux = K+
 unidirectional efflux rate
AJeidux = net increment in K+
 unidirectional
efflux rate
KATP channel = ATP-sensitive K+
 channel
LR-II model = phase II Luo-Rudy model
VECW = extracellular water volume
Vm = membrane potential
type ventricular cardiac AP. We use this model to study
the relationship between APD and intracellular nucleotide
levels and ionic concentrations. The influence of IK.ATP
activation on reduction of APD during ischemia in the
presence of high [K+
]o has been theoretically elucidated.
Finally, the contribution of IK-ATP to the increase in the
rate of K+
 efflux in hypoxia/ischemia is also theoretically
investigated.
Materials and Methods
Model of IK-ATP
General Considerations
The mathematical model of IK-ATP that we formulate here is
based on different sets of published experimental data describing
the dependence of the channel current density on ion concentrations ([K+
]o, [Mg2+]h and [Na+
]j) and intracellular nucleotide
levels ([ATP]; and [ADP],). The parameters of the model are estimated, when necessary, using a linear least-squares method to
fit the experimental data. The complete set of equations of the
model is given in Appendix 1.
Current Density
The general equation describing the current density
is as follows:
(1) fATp( V m — EK.ATp)
where a is the channel density, g0 is the unitary conductance
of a fully activated individual channel, po is the open probability of a channel in the absence of ATP, fATP is the fraction
of activated channels (relative current), and Vm is the
membrane potential. The term EK.ATP is the reversal potential
of the channel, which is equal to the Nernst potential of K +
ions22
 because of the specificity of the channel to K+
 ions in
cardiac muscle cells.
We have used in our simulations a value of 3.8 channels//jm2
for the channel density (derived from data in Reference 14), a
value that is intermediate in the range of reported values for
guinea pig ventricular myocytes. The open probability in the absence of ATP was assumed to be 0.91.17
 The sensitivity of the
results to these parameters is discussed later.
Unitary Conductance
The expression for the unitary conductance (g0) of an individual KATp channel is as follows:
(2) L, Vm, T)=
for the inward rectification of the channel, and fT is a nondimensional temperature (T)-dependent factor.
The value of y0 is known to depend on [K+
],,.22-
23
 In the
present model, we have used the formulation provided in Reference 22 (see Equation 10 of Appendix 1), which is widely
accepted. On the other hand, KATP channels show inward rectification.2223
 This property is the result of a voltage-dependent block caused by Na+
 and Mg!f
 ions and obeys the laws
of saturation kinetics.23
 We used this approach to express both
factors fM (for Mg2+) and fN (for Na+
) in Equation 2 by means
of Hill-type equations (see Equations 11 and 14 in Appendix
1). The half-maximal saturation constants (Khmn) are given by
Eyring rate theory:
(3) exp Vn
where the subscript "ion" stands for Mg2+
 and Na
 +
 , respectively, K°hjm is the value of Khion at zero membrane voltage,
fiion is
 tn e
 electrical distance, zion is the valence of the considered ion, F is the Faraday constant, R is the gas constant, and
T is the absolute temperature. The values of the parameters
used in our simulations and the details of the equations are
listed in Appendix 1.
It is known that increasing levels of extracellular K+
 partially
remove the voltage-dependent block caused by Mg2+
 ions.23
 This
fact was considered in our model by making Ko
h_Mg increase
monotonically with [K+
]o following a square-root dependence
(see Equation 13 in Appendix 1) to fit data from Horie et al.23
Finally, a temperature-dependent term, fT, was introduced by
using a temperature coefficient Qio= 1 -3 (see Equation 16 in Appendix I).23
Fig 1A illustrates the results obtained with the model of the
unitary conductance in terms of the current-voltage relationships
of the channel. The symbols in both plots represent experimental
values corresponding to different values of [K+
](, (data duplicated
from Reference 24). The solid lines represent the curves predicted
by the model.
Nucleotide Dependence
It is well known that when intracellular ATP molecules bind
to the channel protein, it becomes inactivated. Thus, fATP in a
myocyte strongly depends on [ATPJi. Experimental data612142526
are properly fitted by means of a Hill-type equation:
(4) 1
l+([ATP],/£m)
H
where y0 is the unitary conductance in the absence of intracellular
Na +
 and Mg2 +, fM and fN are nondimensional factors that account
where Km is the half-maximum inhibition constant and H is the
Hill coefficient.
Several factors related to the metabolic state of the cell modulate the [ATP], dependence of fATp (for a review, see Reference
27). Among them, free cytosolic ADP is known to stimulate partially inactivated channels in the presence of Mg2+.
14-
2528
 Both
the half-maximal inhibition constant (Km) and the Hill coefficient
of Equation 4 are dependent on free [ADP]j. Using the data reported by Weiss et al,14
 we have modeled the dependence of fATp
on [ADP]i. Specifically, we used the average values of Km and
Hill coefficients for individual membrane patches obtained by
Weiss et al for different values of [ADP1,. The mathematical expressions that result from the best fit are given in Appendix 1
(see Equations 18 and 19); they show a monotonic increase of
Km and a monotonic decrease of the Hill coefficient with [ADPJ,,
respectively.
The fraction of open channels will depend, in this way, on
intracellular concentrations of both ATP and ADP. Fig IB graphically illustrates this dependence in an appropriate way to easily
relate nucleotide levels to fA]P values. Indeed, these curves can
be used to "translate" a given value of fATP to the different combinations of [ATP];-[ADPJ,, which, when present in the cell, give
rise to such a value of fATp. Each curve in the figure can be regarded, then, as an "isoactivation" curve for IK ATPDownloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on July 29, 2024
210 Circulation Research Vol 79, No 2 August 1996
Model of the Ventricular AP
Once the model for IK-ATP was formulated, we incorporated
it into the LR-II model described by Luo and Rudy.21
 This
mathematical model reproduces the AP of endocardial ventricular myocytes of guinea pig-type hearts with a high degree
of electrophysiological detail. It includes mathematical descriptions of 12 different ionic currents, as well as intracellular
Ca 2+
 buffering and the Ca2+-induced Ca 2 +
 release process.
The basic equation that relates Vm to ionic currents is the
following:
Normal Ionic Concentrations
(5)
dV
- ^
at
where Cm is the membrane capacitance, Istim is the stimulus
current, and ZIion is the sum of all the ionic currents that cross
the sarcolemma, namely, the fast Na+
 current (INa), the current
S 8 fl i A
(mmol/L)
1—i—i—i—I—i—
-100 -80 -60 -40 -20 0 20 40
Vm(mV)
0.1 %
0.3%
' I " ' I " ' I 1
 "
0 20 40 60 80 100120140160180 200
[ADP], (umol/L)
FIG 1. Characteristics of KATP channels considered in the model.
A, Single-channel current-voltage relationships for the KATp channel. In this figure, IK-ATP is the current through a single fully activated channel. Symbols indicate experimental values (duplicated from Fig 6A in Reference 24); solid lines are simulation
results. Each plot corresponds to a different value of [K+
]o. Intracellular concentrations of Na+
, K+
, and Mg2+
 are 8, 140, and
3.1 mmol/L, respectively. B, fATP as a function of [ATP]; and [ADP];.
Equations 4,12, and 13 were used to generate these plots. Each
curve corresponds here to a certain value of fATP (indicated in
percentage above each curve).
Ion
Na+
Ca2
-
K+
Mg2
~
Concentration, mmol/L
Intracellular
10
0.12X1CT3
145
0.5
Extracellular
140
1.8
5.4
Bulk
140
1.8
5.4
through the L-type Ca 2 +
 channels (ICa,t).* the delayed rectifier
K+
 current (IK), the inward rectifier K+
 current (IK1), the plateau K+
 current (IKp), the Na + -Ca 2 +
 exchanger current (INaca).
the Na + -K+
 pump current (INaK), a nonspecific Ca2+-activated
K+
 and Na +
 current (Ins), and the current carried by the sarcolemmal Ca 2 +
 pump (Ip(ca))- Mathematical details of this
model can be found elsewhere.21
In our simulations, extracellular ionic concentrations were
held constant, unless otherwise noted (see "Extracellular K +
Accumulation" below). Intracellular concentrations changed
dynamically as a result of ionic fluxes through the sarcolemma. The normal values of extracellular concentrations and
initial intracellular concentrations are listed in the Table. All
simulations correspond to a temperature of 37°C.
Stimulation Protocol
In each simulation, unless otherwise noted (see "Extracellular
K+
 Accumulation" below), constant values were assigned to each
relevant parameter of the model (ie, fATP and ionic concentrations), and in these conditions, the cell was stimulated with a
constant BCL. In order to achieve steady state conditions and to
avoid alternants in APD, 10 APs were elicited before recording
the data. The stimulus consisted of rectangular current pulses 2
ms in duration and an amplitude 1.5 times the diastolic threshold.
APD
We defined APD in our simulations as the interval between
the instant of maximum upstroke velocity of the AP, [dV/dt]max,
and the instant of 90% repolarization.
Calculation of JeraUx
When calculating the rate of K+
 efflux from the cell, the basic
LR-II model was slightly modified so as to achieve zero net K +
efflux under basal normoxic conditions. Specifically, the maximum current density through the Na + -K+
 pump was increased
from 1.5 to 2.61 fiA/pF, which is still in the range of measured
values.29
 This change affects AP morphology only slightly (small
decrease of APD due to accelerated repolarization).
To compute Jefllux, we started by subtracting the K+
 (inward)
current carried by the Na + -K+
 pump from the total K+
 current
(IK,T) to obtain the total outward K+
 current (IK,o)- Taking into
account the 3:2 stoichiometry of the pump, this results in
lK,o=lK,T+2INaK (where INaK is the Na + -K+
 pump current). We
then calculated the average outward current density (Iout) as the
integral mean value of IK,o- In order to compare the simulation
results with experimental data, the current density value was
translated to Jefflux (in (/mal-g^-mm'1
) using the following
expression:
600000/1 \
(o) Jefflux— ^ I — VE Cw )SvIOut
F \P I
The assumed values of the parameters in Equation 6 were p= 1
kg/L for the myocardial density, VECW=0.52 L/kg wet wt for the
*Note that the correct formulation of the term fx, which appears
in the L-type Ca2+
 current formulation, is given in the text of the
article by Luo and Rudy21
 (page 1073) and not in the list of equations
at the end of said article.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on July 29, 2024
Ferrero et al Model of the Cardiac ATP-Sensitive K+
 Current 211
extracellular water content,30
 and Sv=0.3 ^varlfjm3
 for the surface-to-volume ratio of the myocyte. F stands for the Faraday
constant. Details about derivation of Equation 6 can be found in
Appendix 2.
Finally, AJefllux was calculated as the difference between the
actual value of Jefflux and its control value (corresponding to
fATP=0%).
Extracellular K+
 Accumulation
We also carried out long simulations in which extracellular K+
accumulation was studied. In these simulations, the cell was
paced with a BCL of 800 ms, and fATp was either abruptly or
gradually increased. Extracellular concentrations were permitted
to change dynamically as a result of ionic fluxes through the
cellular membrane. A three-compartment model was assumed,
and diffusion of ions from the extracellular cleft to the bulk extracellular medium was considered. Thus, ionic concentrations in
the cleft can be described by the following equation:
A.
d[S]o
dt VECW z sF
l
 v«E
p
T
Us.total
where [S]o and [S]buik are the concentrations of the ionic species
S in the extracellular cleft and in the bulk extracellular medium,
respectively. The term zs is the valence of the ionic species S,
and Is.totai stands for the total current through the sarcolemma
carried by the ionic species S. Finally, rdiff (1 s) is the time constant associated with the diffusion of ions from the cleft to the
bulk extracellular medium.
When simulating extracellular K+
 accumulation during noflow ischemia, the diffusion term in Equation 7 was omitted (rdiff)
to account for the lack of flow.
The modified version of the Na+
-K+
 pump in the LR-II model
was also used in the simulations (see "Calculation of Jefnux"
above).
Computation Methods
Programs were written in ACSL language using Gear stiff algorithm31
 to solve the nonlinear system of differential equations
that results from the AP model. Simulations were carried out in
a SUN SparcStation 1 using double-precision variables. To ensure numerical accuracy, the maximum allowed time step was 10
fis. The maximum relative error allowed for every variable in
each iteration was 10 ~6
.
Results
In all the simulations that are presented in this section,
fATP is varied, and the effect of this variation on AP configuration, ionic currents, and K+
 efflux is investigated. A
given value of fATP can be related to [ATP]i and [ADP];
using the isoactivation curves shown in Fig IB.
Effects of KATP Channel Opening on AP
Configuration and Ionic Currents
The effects of the progressive activation of IK-ATP °n the
characteristics of the ventricular AP were first investigated
using normal nonischemic values for the ionic concentrations. The values used are listed in the Table.
Fig 2 shows the results of these simulations. In Fig 2A,
a set of APs that correspond to different values of fATP is
shown. It can be noted that AP configuration varies significantly when KATP channels become activated, even
with very low values of fArp. When fATP increases, there is
a marked reduction in APD, a moderate reduction of the
plateau potential, and a slight diastolic hyperpolarization.
Resting Vm, whose value is —86.5 mV in control
(fATP=0%) conditions, decreases almost linearly to reach
a value of -87.1 mV for fATP=2.5%. This would be in
50 i
0 -
-50-
-100 J
. 2.5%
1.0%
100 ms
0.0
C.
1
2 - i
n —u
8 -
6 "
4 -
2 -
n —
<
2.5%
zi.0%
0.6%
\ r 04%
\ y , 0.2%
XTV/ 0.1%
100 ms
FIG 2. Results of the model under conditions of normal ionic
concentrations (see Table). A, Simulated APs for different values
of fATP (numbers indicated, in percentage, for each curve). The
cell was electrically stimulated with a BCL of 800 ms. B, Normalized APD as a function of fATP for two different BCLs (475
and 800 ms). APD is normalized in each case to its control value
(184.1 ms for BCL=800 ms, and 175.2 ms for BCL=475 ms),
which corresponds to fATP=0%. C, Time course of the total K+
current crossing the sarcolemma (IK,T, calculated as the net sum
of all K+
 currents carried by sarcolemmal K+
 channels and
pumps) for different degrees of KATP channel activation. The same
BCL as in panel A was used.
accordance with the slight diastolic hyperpolarization observed by Gasser and Vaughan-Jones 1 5
 in myocytes exposed to hypoxic conditions, although other studies have
reported opposite results. 3 2
 The cell becomes completely
unexcitable for f ATP ^3.1 % for the standard stimulus used
in the simulations (not shown).
The reduction in APD caused by increasing activation
of IK-ATP is represented in Fig 2B, in which the results
corresponding to two different BCLs are compared. For
each BCL, the APD has been normalized to its maximum
value, which corresponds to the complete inactivation of
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on July 29, 2024
212 Circulation Research Vol 79, No 2 August 1996
the KATP channels. For a BCL of 800 ms, the figure shows
how the activation of ^0.6% of the total population of
channels is sufficient to account for a 50% shortening in
APD. This figure increases to »0.7% when the pacing
frequency is increased to a BCL of 475 ms.
The value of fATP needed to shorten APD to half its
control value is in accordance with several experimental
results.111314
 Moreover, the rate of change of APD with
fATp agrees very nicely with indirect experimental findings
by Nichols and Lederer.12
Activation of IK.ATP modifies the ionic sarcolemmal currents
significantly. Fig 2C shows the evolution of the total K+
 current (IKJ-) as activation of IK.ATP progresses. The total time during which the K+
 currents are flowing shortens in correspondence with the reduction in APD. Both the maximum peak of
IK,T and the amplitude of the K+
 current "plateau" increase
with fATP. The secondary peak of the K+
 current in phase 3,
mainly due to activation of the time-independent IK1, also increases, although only slightly, with fATP.
Fig 3 depicts the relative contributions of IK-ATP and the rest
of the sarcolemmal K+
 currents to IKJ-. The time courses of IK_
ATP and of the sum of all the other K+
 currents (IK.R) are compared for six different values of fATP. The shape of IK-ATP is
 a
distorted version of the AP waveform, due to the inward rectification of the KATP channels, and presents a plateau whose
level is proportional to the degree of channel activation. Regarding IK.R, both the initial peak during depolarization (due
mainly to the plateau K+
 current and to IK1) and the secondary
peak during repolarization (due basically to IKi) are practically
independent of fATP. Opening of KATP channels significantly
depresses the plateau of IKR. It is noticeable that for degrees
of KATP channel activation over 0.4%, the overall contribution
of IK-ATP to IKT is higher than the contribution of all the rest of
the K+
 currents added together.
Effects of Changes on Ionic Concentrations
In the next set of simulations, [Mg2+]j, [Na+
]i; and [K+
]o
are varied in turn while the other ionic concentrations remain at their control levels (see the Table). The effects of
changes in these concentrations, which modulate the activity of the KATP channels, on AP configuration and APD
are further investigated.
Changes in [Mg2+]t
Myoplasmic free Mg2+, which partially blocks KATp
channels in a voltage-dependent fashion, is known to increase from its control level (»0.5 mmol/L) to «2.5
mmol/L in 6 to 9 minutes of global ischemia.33
 To investigate the effects of increased intracellular Mg2+
 level on
AP configuration, we simulated APs under different KATP
channel activation degrees for three different [Mg2+]; levels. The results are shown in Fig 4. Each of the six sets of
APs plotted in Fig 4A corresponds to a fixed value of fATP.
It can be seen that increased levels of intracellular Mg2+
partially counteract the AP shortening caused by IK-ATPHigh [Mg2+]j also elevates the AP plateau level because
of the enhanced inward rectification of the KATP channels.
The relationship between normalized APD and fATP for
different [Mg2+]i levels is plotted in Fig 4B. Note that the
effect of intracellular Mg2+
 on APD is more significant at
higher values of fATp- The fraction of channels needed to
be activated to reduce APD to 50% rises from »0.6% for
[Mg2+],=0.5 mmol/L to »0.8% for [Mg2+], = 1.5 mmol/L
and «1.0% for [Mg2+];=2.5 mmol/L. The current through
KATP channels at Vm=0 mV is reduced from 80% to 46%
of the maximum possible current when [Mg2+], increases
from 0.5 to 2.5 mmol/L. According to these results, the
effect of an increased intracellular Mg2+
 level during hypoxia/ischemia has a considerable effect on APD, reducing
the KATP-mediated shortening of the AP.
Changes in [Na +]t
Next, we investigated the effects of increased levels of
intracellular Na+
. APs corresponding to different values
of [Na+
]j and different values of fATP are shown in Fig 5A.
Changes in [Na+
]; have two different effects on AP configuration. The first one is independent of KATP channels
and is due to the dependence on [Na+
]; exhibited by several ionic channels, pumps, and exchangers in the sarcolemma.21
 This direct effect tends to shorten the AP when
intracellular levels of Na+
 rise, even in the absence of KATP
channel activation. Fig 5B, which shows the dependence
of APD on fATP for three different values of [Na+
]j, illustrates this phenomenon. All APDs are referred to the value
that corresponds to fATP=0% and [Na+
]i=10 mmol/L.
Note, indeed, that for any constant value of fATp, AP shortens as [Na+
]j increases. On the other hand, as discussed
previously, intracellular Na+
 causes a partial voltage-dependent block in KATp channels. This would tend to reduce
the AP shortening caused by IK-ATP activation, as happens
with intracellular Mg2+. To further investigate this effect,
8 -
6 -
4 -
2 -
0 —
8 -
6 -
4 -
2 -
fATP = 0.1 % fAW-0.2%
100 ms
1
X
—Jv
fAW-1.0%
L. J
fATP = 0.4%
fATP = 2.5%
c >
[ ]^ —
FIG 3. Time course of K+
 currents
for different values of fA-rp- Ionic concentrations are listed in the Table.
O indicates IK.ATP; • , lKfl.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on July 29, 2024
Ferrero et al Model of the Cardiac ATP-Sensitive K+
 Current 213
A.
50 -i
B -50
-100
fATP=0.2%
50 -i
>a
-50
-100
L fATp- 1.0 1.0%%
2.5 mmol/L
5 mmol/L
0.5 mmol/L
[Mg2
*]i (mmol/L)
' ' ' I ' ' n I ' ' I ' ' ' 1
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0
fAW (%)
FIG 4. Effect of intracellular Mg2+
levels on AP configuration. A BCL
of 800 ms was used in the simulations. Ionic concentrations other
than [Mg2+]| are listed in the Table.
A, Simulated APs corresponding to
different degrees of KATP channel
activation (values of fATP are indicated above each set). The longest
of the three APs on each panel corresponds to [Mg2+]i=2.5 mmol/L;
the central one, to 1.5 mmol/L; and
the shortest one, to 0.5 mmol/L. B,
Normalized APD as a function of
fATP for three different values of
[Mg2+]i. Control value of APD
(100% level) is 184.1 ms.
we constructed Fig 5C by normalizing APD values in a
different way. Each value of APD corresponding to a
given level of intracellular Na+
 was normalized to the
maximum APD value (corresponding to fATP=0%) found
under that particular [Na+
](. In this way, the direct effect
of intracellular Na+
 previously mentioned is eliminated,
while the KATP-dependent effect is maintained and amplified. When APD values are normalized in this manner, it
can be seen (Fig 5C) that all the curves (APD versus fATP)
fall reasonably well on a single curve, with maximum differences in APD values being in the range of 5% for all
values of fATP. This means that the effect of [Na+
], on APD
mediated by KATP channels is very small in the range of
[Na+
]i tested. Note that the current through KATP channels
at Vm=0 mV is reduced from 87% to 63% of the maximum
possible current when [Na+
]j is increased from 10 to 20
mmol/L, which is much less significant than the reduction
caused by Mg2+.
Changes in [K+
]o
Increases in [K+
]o that take place in ischemic episodes
are known to profoundly affect APD. The effects of high
[K+
]o on APD are mediated in part by an increase in the
conductance of both the inward rectifier (gKi) and the delayed rectifier (gK) channels, something which tends to decrease APD. Similarly, [K+
]o is also known to affect the
conductance of KATP channels in a similar manner.22
We used the model to investigate the effect of [K+
]o
on AP configuration for different degrees of activation of
IK ATP- Fig 6 depicts the results obtained. The upper left
APs in Fig 6A correspond to complete inactivation of
IK-ATP, and it is seen, as expected, how APD reduces in
response to increases in [K+
]o. APs also exhibit diastolic
depolarization, which is due to the increase in [K+
]o. The
other five sets of APs in Fig 6A show the effects of the
progressive activation of IK-ATP on AP configuration. As
fATp increases, APD is further decreased, resting Vm is
scarcely affected, and the absolute influence of [K+
]o on
APD is reduced.
Fig 6B shows the effect of [K+
]o on the APD-fATP dependence. APD values are normalized to the reference
value corresponding to fATP=0% and [K+
]O=5.4 mmol/L.
The fraction of open KATP channels needed to produce a
50% reduction in APD is reduced from =»0.6% to 0.55%,
0.48%, and 0.38% as [K+
]o increases from 5.4 mmol/L to
7.5, 9.5, and 11.5 mmol/L, respectively.
However, if we normalize the values of APD for each
value of [K+
]o to their control value (fATP=0%) corresponding to that particular [K+
]o, the results are different.
As illustrated in Fig 6C, the relative reduction of APD
normalized in this way is independent of [K+
]o (all the
points fall reasonably well in one single curve). These
results suggest that both high [K+
]o and KATP channel
activation tend to reduce APD, but the effects of these
two factors seem to be independent of one another. Indeed, Fig 6C shows that for any value of [K+
]o in the
range of early ischemia, «0.6% of the total population
of channels, when open, always cause a 50% reduction
in APD from its control value independently of [K+
]o.
Similarly (although not shown in the figures), for a fixed
value of fATP in the range of 0% to 2.5%, APD is reduced
to 76% of its control value when [K+
]o increases from
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on July 29, 2024
214 Circulation Research Vol 79, No 2 August 1996
A.
50-,
>S
 -50
-100
50
i~ o H
>6
-50
-100 - 1
18mmol/L
15 mmo
10 mmol/L
= 0.6%
FIG 5. Effects of intracellular
Na+
 on APD. A, Simulated APs
corresponding to different degrees of KATp channel activation
(values of fATp are indicated
above each set). The longest of
the three APs on each panel corresponds to [Na+
],=10 mmol/L;
the central one, to 15 mmol/L;
and the shortest one, to 18 mmol/
L. B, Normalized APD as a function of fATP for three different values of [Na+
],. Control values of
APD for each [Na+
]i, corresponding to fATP=0%, are 184.1 ms
([Na+
]i=1u mmol/L, 100% reference value), 161.4 ms ([Na+
],=
15 mmol/L), and 132.2 ms
([Na+
]i=20 mmol/L). The cell was
stimulated with a BCL of 800 ms.
Ionic concentrations other than
[Na^]i are listed in the Table. C,
Same data as in panel B but normalized with a different criterion.
For each value of [Na+
],, the normalized APD was referred to the
corresponding control value
specified above.
o.o
5.4 to 11.5 mmol/L, independently of the value of fATp
considered.
Fig 6B can also be used to compare the separate effects
of high [K ¥]a and KATP channel activation on AP shortening. It is seen that in the range of values chosen for [K+
](,
and fATP, the effect of KATP channel activation on AP shortening under conditions of normal [K+
]o is more pronounced than that of extracellular K+
 accumulation alone.
In the absence of KATP channel activation, typical early
ischemic levels of [K+] o of 11 to 12 mmol/L16
 shorten the
APD to «75% of its control value. On the other hand,
activation of 0.6% of the total population of KATp channels,
which might be a typical value in early ischemia (see
"Discussion" and Reference 14), reduces APD to «50%
in the presence of normal K+
 levels.
Cellular K+
 Loss
It is a well-known phenomenon that cardiac myocytes
lose K+
 during metabolically impaired situations. In ischemic episodes, K+
 loss begins at —15 s after the onset
of ischemia, and net K+
 efflux rate reaches a peak value
in the range of 0.3 to 0.5 /v,mol/(g-min).416
 In substratefree hypoxia, net K+
 loss averages 0.54 to 0.60 fjmoil
(g • min).1434
 Finally, net K+
 efflux rate seems to be higher,
^0.9 /imol/(g • min) in hypoxia with glucose present.4
The model presented here can be used to quantify the
K+
 loss caused by the activation of IK ATP- For this purpose,
we simulate APs for different pacing frequencies and different [K+] o levels and quantify Jefflux and AJcfflux using
Equation 6 (see "Materials and Methods").
Fig 7A shows the magnitude of AJefflux (shown as AJT
in Fig 7) as a function of fATP for two different values of
BCL. As depicted in the figure, net increment in K+
 loss
shows a biphasic behavior with KATP channel activation.
Indeed, AJefflux initially increases with fATp, reaching a
maximum value of 0.08 /Ltmol-g^'-mkr1
 (BCL=800ms)
or 0.16 jumol-g ' -min"1
 (BCL=475 ms) for fATPof »1% .
From this point, AJefflux decreases as IK-ATP is further increased and even becomes negative for fATP >2.25%
(BCL=800 ms) or 2.75% (BCL=475 ms).
The level of extracellular K+
 modulates the rate of K+
 loss
from the cell, as demonstrated in Fig 7B, in which AJefflux is
plotted against fATP for two different values of [K+
]o. It is
noticeable how the maximum AJ,.fflux decreases when [K+
]o
increases (0.081 //mol-g^'-min"1
 for [K+
L=5.4 mmol/L,
0.044 ^mol-g- 1
 -min"1
 for [K+
]O=8.5 mmol/L). The degree
of KATP channel opening for which the maximum takes place
is also reduced (0.8% for [K+
]O=5.4 mmol/L, 0.7% for
[K+
JO=8.5 mmol/L). Thus, in ischemic situations in which
extracellular K+
 accumulation takes place, cellular K+
 loss
through the KATP channels would be even smaller.
The rate of cellular K+
 loss mediated by IK-ATP obtained
with the model is significantly lower than the values of
total K+
 efflux found experimentally. Panels C and D of
Fig 7 compare the simulation results with experimental
measures of K+
 loss in different situations.41416-
34
 In Fig
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on July 29, 2024
Ferrero et al Model of the Cardiac ATP-Sensitive K+
 Current 215
A.
50 -|
I
-100 -1
50
I 0
11.5 mmol/L'
9.5 mmol/L
7.5 mmol/L
5.4 mmol/L
>S
-50
-100 - 1
0.0 2.0
FIG 6. Effect of extracellular IC
levels on AP configuration. Ionic
concentrations other than [K+
]o
are listed in the Table. A BCL of
800 ms was used in the simulations. A, Simulated APs corresponding to different degrees of
KATp channel activation (values
of fATP are indicated above each
set). The longest of the four APs on
each panel corresponds to
[K+
]O=5.4 mmol/L; the central
ones, to 7.5 mmol/L and 9.5 mmol/
L; and the shortest one, to 11.5
mmol/L. B, Normalized APD as a
function of fATP for different values
of [K+
]o. Control values of APD for
each [K+
]o, corresponding to
fATp=0%, are 184.1 ms ([K-]O=5.4
mmol/L, 100% reference value),
165.4 ms ([K+
]O=7.5 mmol/L),
152.9 ms ([K+
]O=9.5 mmol/L), and
140.3 ms ([K+
]o=11.5 mmol/L). C,
Same data as in panel B but normalized with a different criterion.
For each value of [K+
]o, the normalized APD was referred to the
corresponding control value specified above.
7C, Jefflux, corresponding to a pacing frequency of 75 bpm
(BCL=800 ms) obtained with the model, is compared with
the experimental values obtained by Venkatesh et al34
 in
similar experimental conditions. In normoxia, both theoretical and experimental values agree nicely (1.11 versus
1.24 //mol-g^'-min"1
, respectively). However, in substrate-free hypoxia, the empirical Jetnux greatly exceeds the
maximum theoretical KATP-related Jefflux (1.79 versus 1.18
jiimol-g"1
 -min"1
, respectively).
Fig 7D compares the values of AJefflux caused by IKATP
activation, obtained with the model, with those obtained
experimentally in different conditions. For the theoretical
results, the maximum values of AJefflllx in each situation
have been chosen. The experimental values correspond to
the peak of the K+
 efflux rate during the ischemic episode.
It can be seen that, with only one exception, experimental
values of AJefflux increase with pacing frequency. The figure shows that theoretical AJefflux through KATP channels is
in the order of 5 to 7 times less than experimental values
obtained in similar conditions. Thus, IKATP activation does
not seem to quantitatively account for the entire observed
hypoxic/ischemic cellular K+
 loss. All these results will
be discussed in the next section.
Extracellular K+
 Accumulation
Many experimental studies have been published about
the time course of [K+
]o during ischemia. There is general
agreement in that, during early ischemia, [K+
]o initially
increases and then plateaus at a level of «10 to 12 mmol/
L 4.14,2030,35 rpj^ behavior ca n ^e qualitatively reproduced
by the model, as seen in Fig 8. In Fig 8A, no-flow ischemia
has been simulated by abruptly increasing fATP from 0%
to 1.0%, while preventing K+
 diffusion from the extracellular cleft to bulk extracellular medium (see "Materials
and Methods"). It can be noted from the figure that [K+
]o
is approximately constant during normoxic perfusion
(fATP=0%), because net K+
 efflux is zero in normal conditions. However, when KATP current becomes activated,
[K+
]o rises until a steady state is reached (within minutes),
when [K+
]o increases in a linear manner. This reflects the
constant value of Jrfflux in this situation (constant slope of
s=»0.13 mmol/L per second, which corresponds to a Jef^,,
of 0.075 /rniol-g-'-mirT1
).
In Fig 8B, no-flow ischemia is simulated in a more realistic manner. KATP channels are progressively (and linearly) activated from 0% to 2.5% during 10 minutes. In
this time frame, [K+
]o increases from 5.4 to 8.0 mmol/L,
reaching an approximately constant plateau.
Although the time course of [K+
]o shown in Fig 8B is
qualitatively similar to those obtained experimentally, the
values of [K+
]o reached are substantially smaller than the
measured ones. Thus, again it is shown how, according to
the model, ischemic K+
 loss through KATP channels does
not account for the total observed cellular K+
 loss.
Discussion
The extent to which activation of IK-ATP contributes to
the reduction of APD and to other electrophysiological
changes during metabolically impaired situations still remains unanswered from a quantitative point of view. We
have used a computer modeling approach to the problem
to elucidate this issue. Although computer models cannot
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on July 29, 2024
216 Circulation Research Vol 79, No 2 August 1996
A.
0.18
C.
Model
I I Experiments (Venkatesh et al)
2-
1.5 2.0 2.5 NORMOXIA HYPOXIA
B. D. 0.10 1.6 H
_p 1.4 4
• | 1.2- j
"so 1 0
 1
|
 08 1
S 0.6 -_
*f 0.4 4 <
 0.2 4
n n -
• Total A JT (experiments)
H Contribution of IK.A1P to A JT
500
667X
800 T
22m
f
1 200
gooj
(model)
500
—i "T
Tl
2.5 (a) (b) (c) (d) (e)
HYPOXIA
(f) (g) (d) (e)
ISCHEMIA
FIG 7. Model predictions regarding cellular K+
 loss related to KATP
channel activation. A, Net increment in K+
 efflux rate (AJT) vs fATP
for two values of BCL (indicated
beside each curve) and normal
ionic concentrations. B, Comparison between AJT values for two
different extracellular K+
 levels
(values of [K+
]o indicated beside
each curve). BCL was 800 ms. C,
Unidirectional K+
 efflux rates (JT)
in normally perfused conditions
and in substrate-free hypoxia
taken from Reference 34 compared with model results. In the
simulations, "normoxia" corresponds to an fATP of 0%, and
"hypoxia" corresponds to an fATP
of 0.9%, which yields the maximum value of JT. Ionic concentrations are those given in the
Table. Both in simulations and in
experiments, BCL was 800 ms. D,
Values of AJT corresponding to
different experimental results in
hypoxic and ischemic situations
compared with model results regarding the KATP-related K+
 loss.
Numbers over each bar indicate
the value (in milliseconds) of the
BCL used in the simulation experiment. In simulation results,
fATp yielding the maximum AJT
was considered. In experimental
ischemic results, the peak value
of AJT in the ischemic period
is represented. The abscissa is
labeled as follows: a, simulation (fATp=0.9%, normal ionic
concentrations); b, simulation
(fATP=1.0%, normal ionic concentrations); c, data from Reference
34; d, data from Reference 14; e,
data from Reference 4; f, simulation (fATP=0.7%, normal ionic concentrations except for [K+
]O=8.5
mmol/L); and g, data from Reference 16.
provide real data, they can be used to make predictions
and, in this case, can help us to understand the role of
KATp channels in hypoxia-ischemia from a theoretical
point of view.
The cardiac action potential model described by Luo
and Rudy,21
 which has been used in the present study, is
based on very recent patch-clamp data and reproduces
membrane dynamics with a great degree of electrophysiological detail. The inclusion of a new formulation of the
KATP current in this model makes it possible to simulate
metabolically impaired situations more comprehensively.
Model of IK-ATP
In its original form, the LR-II action potential model21
does not include a mathematical description of IK-ATP- The
first goal of the present study was to formulate a comprehensive model for this current. Our description of IK-ATP is
based on published experimental data regarding the main
characteristics of the current.14-
17-
22-
23
 We have integrated
the available data regarding IK_ATp dependencies on [K+
]o,
[Na+
]j, [Mg2+]l; [ATP]j, and [ADP]; in a single set of equations. The model of IK.ATP finally formulated satisfactorily
reproduces the main electrical features of KATP channels
(eg, see Fig 1A and compare with Fig 6A of Reference
24). Other factors not considered in the model have been
ignored because of their presumed lack of a physiological
role during the early phase of hypoxia/ischemia (eg, rundown of the channel24), lack of enough data to formulate
a reliable model (eg, dependence on pH;25>3M7
 and on other
nucleotides25'
38
 and effects of [Mg2+] on the fraction of
open channels39), or lack of agreement between different
authors (eg, dependence on lactate2540). It is to be noted
that the effects of some of these factors, particularly the
effects of acidosis, could be of considerable importance in
hypoxic/ischemic situations.
To our knowledge, only a few authors have incorporated
a model of IK.ATP in an AP model and used it to study the
effect of IK-ATP activation in cardiac myocytes. Nichols and
Lederer'2
 incorporated a formulation of I K A TP into the
model of rat ventricular AP described by Noble.41
 This
formulation included only the dependence on [ATP]b although the dependence on [ADP]; was implicitly considered. More recently, the incorporation of a model of IK.ATP
that considered dependencies on both [ATP]j and [K+] o to
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on July 29, 2024
Ferrero et al Model of the Cardiac ATP-Sensitive K+
 Current 217
B.
si
0-2.5% (linear)
FIG 8. Simulated time course of [K+
]o after opening of KATP channels. Values of fATP during time are represented below each plot.
A, Time course of [K+
]o after an abrupt opening of KATP channels
(fATp=1.0%). B, Time course of [K+
]o after a linear increase of fATP
from 0% to 2.5%. Note the different time scales in both panels.
an AP model has been reported.42
 In a different context,
Cook et al10
 used a simple computer model to explain the
spare-channel hypothesis for beta pancreatic cells. Our description of IK-ATP is more comprehensive than these previous attempts, because it considers dependencies on intracellular ionic concentrations and intracellular ADP as
well as on [K+
]o and [ATP];.
The model used in the present study has several limitations. In its present form, it cannot be used to simulate
true ischemia, for it lacks a description of other important
ischemia-related phenomena apart from IK-ATP activation.
Among them, the most important one might be the influence of acidosis on ionic currents. Also, intracellular ATP
decline, free Mg2+
 rise, and catecholamine release are
known to affect other ionic currents, and this should also
be considered in a more complete model. Specifically, a
more detailed model of the Na+
-K+
 pump would be desirable to determine net K+
 efflux during metabolic inhibition with more accuracy. In its present version, the pump
current dependencies on both [Na+
]; and [K+
]o are considered,21
 but the model lacks a description of its dependence
on ATP and other metabolically related parameters. The
influence of [Mg2+]; on APD through inward Ca2+
 channels43
 should also be considered. Finally, other pathophysiologically activated currents (such as the Na+
-activated
K+
 current and the free fatty acid-activated K+
 current)
also deserve some attention.
Effect of I KATP on APD
The theoretical results obtained with our model are in
excellent agreement with the spare-channel hypothesis that
was proposed by Cook et al10
 for pancreatic cells and was
later extended to cardiac cells, according to which only a
very small fraction of the total population of KATP channels
in a myocyte needs to be activated to account for the major
electrophysiological changes observed in metabolic impairment. Indeed, according to our model, activation of
< 1 % of the total number of KATP channels accounts for a
50% reduction in APD in all situations simulated. The
value of =0.6% obtained for normal ionic concentrations
correlates well with the values obtained experimentally using indirect methods, namely, 1%," 0.7%,13
 and 0.41%.14
The degree of KATP channel activation needed to account for a 50% reduction in APD might be easily
achieved in early hypoxic and ischemic situations. For example, Weiss et al14
 reported nucleotide levels of
[ATP],=4.3 mmol/L and [ADP],=95 /xmol/L after 10
minutes of substrate-free hypoxia. This would correspond,
according to Fig IB, to fATp=0.68%. In the same experimental study, 10 minutes of ischemia reduced intracellular
ATP to 4.6 mmol/L and increased free cytosolic ADP to
63 to 99 /xmol/L, which would yield a value between
0.57% and 0.63% for fATP. Thus, it is seen that even if
intracellular ATP levels fall only modestly during early
hypoxia/ischemia, activation of KATP channels may account for drastic reductions in APD. It is clear that the rise
in free cytosolic ADP levels is a key factor to quantitatively explain the APD reduction. Indeed, if [ADP]j was
held constant, fATP would reach a hypoxic/ischemic value
of only =0.2%, which is far less than the 0.6% needed to
reduce APD to half its control value.
Our results also indicate that the fraction of open KATP
channels that exist during normal perfusion causes some
degree of "baseline" shortening in the AP, which would
theoretically be reversed by applying a perfect KATP channel blocker. Indeed, using the normoxic values of intracellular ATP and ADP (6.8 mmol/L and 15 /xmol/L, respectively) reported by Weiss et al,14
 the normal value of
fATP would be 0.11%. According to Fig 2B, this would
cause a reduction in APD to =88% to 91 % of the value it
would have in the complete absence of IK-ATP- This result
is in agreement with one experimental report44
 but contradicts others regarding the inefficiency of sulfonylureas to
prolong APD in normally perfused myocytes.1734
 If we
consider a new reference value for APD that corresponds
to fATP=0.11%, then the fraction of open channels needed
to be activated to reduce APD to 50% of its normal value
would now be =0.7% instead of 0.6%.
Regarding the influence of intracellular cations on the
AP shortening caused by IK-ATP, the results of our model
show that pathophysiological levels of Mg2+
 exert a strong
influence on APD, whereas the direct (KATP-related) effect
of Na+
 is much less noticeable. Intracellular free Mg2+
 is
known to rise in early ischemia,33
 and this would reduce
the KATP-mediated effects of ATP depletion on APD (Fig
4). However, high levels of intracellular Mg2+
 are known
to significantly shorten APD by reducing Ca2+
 inward
currents.43
 Thus, elevated free [Mg2+]; would have at
least two opposite effects on APD, with KATP-dependent
effects partially counteracting Ca2+
 current-dependent
APD shortening.
As for the reduction of APD caused by increased Na+
levels (Fig 5B), it is mainly due to an enhanced activity of
the Na+
-K+
 pump as a response to high [Na+
];, being practically independent of KATP channel activity. This effect is
not likely to be physiologically significant: the extent to
which [Na+
]i increases during early ischemia is not unanimously established,20
 and whether the activity of the electrogenic Na+
-K+
 pump is enhanced or depressed during
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on July 29, 2024
218 Circulation Research Vol 79, No 2 August 1996
the first phase of ischemia and hypoxia is still not completely determined.20
Effects of IK-ATP Activation and High [K+
]o in
Ischemic AP Shortening
The question of the contribution of high extracellular
K+
 and of KATp channel activation to AP shortening is still
being debated. Although it is generally accepted that IK.ATP
activation is the key factor in ischemic APD reduction,"15
experimental evidence exists that questions this hypothesis.4
-
7
'
9
 According to a recent report by Yan et al,4
 ischemic
AP shortening would be due to high [K+
]o, and the role of
IK-ATP in this matter would be irrelevant because KATP channels would not become activated at all. The reduction of
APD following extracellular K+
 accumulation is due to the
[K+
]0-dependent change of the current-voltage relation. Indeed, elevated levels of [K+
]o produce an increase in both
the delayed rectifier current (IK) and the inward rectifier
current (IK1) because their conductance increases with [K+
]o
according to a square-root law21
 and rectification is partially
relieved. This elevation in outward current accelerates repolarization, thus leading to a shortening in APD.
The results of Yan et al,4
 however, show that hypoxia
with high [K+
]o produces an additional shortening of the
AP that is not due to high [K+
]o only (see Fig 7 of Reference
4). This result has also been obtained in another experimental study.45
 According to our theoretical results, a very
low degree of KATP channel activation may easily account
for this additional APD reduction. Indeed, both high [K+
]o
and IK.ATP activation cooperate to shorten AP (see Fig 6). In
the complete absence of IK-ATP activation, the Luo-Rudy
model21
 predicts a reduction of relative APD from 100% to
71% when [K+
]o rises from 4.0 to 10.3 mmol/L, which is
in very good agreement with the value reported by Yan.
Given this [K+
]o, <0.2% of the total population of KATP
channels would need to open to account for the additional
APD reduction (58%) observed by Yan. This degree of activation would in turn be achieved even with very modest
variations in intracellular nucleotide concentrations.
In another study, Kodama et al45
 observed that the reduction in APD caused by substrate-free hypoxia with a
high [K+
]o was similar to that obtained under normal
[K+
]o. If the data of their Table 1 regarding APD at 80%
repolarization are normalized in the same manner as in Fig
6C, it can be deduced that the normalized APD values for
different [K+
]o for 10 and 15 minutes of hypoxia are practically independent of the value of [K+
]o. Our results illustrated in Fig 6C are in agreement with this observation.
Moreover, their results regarding APD reduction in different degrees of hyperkalemia under normoxic and hypoxic conditions (see their Table 1) nicely agree with the
results of our model (partially depicted in Fig 6B), suggesting that the hypoxia-related AP shortening is mainly
due to the activation of IK-ATPIschemic K+
 Loss and Extracellular
K+
 Accumulation
Our results support the idea that KATP channel activation
does not fully account for the observed cellular K+
 loss
during hypoxia/ischemia. The model predicts the existence
of a net increment in Jrfflllx in hypoxia/ischemia, but its
magnitude is significantly lower than that observed experimentally (Fig 7C and 7D). Qualitatively, though, our
model predicts the well-known plateau of [K+
]o during the
early phase of ischemia (see Fig 8B). According to our
results, this plateau is reached because of the biphasic behavior of Ajefflux (Fig 7A and 7B). Initially, activation of
KATP channel causes an increase in AJefflux, but after a certain value of f ATP is reached, this trend changes and A Jefflux
declines until it reaches zero value. This would cause a
stabilization of [K+
]o, as shown in Fig 8B.
However, our simulations show that the fraction of the
total K+
 loss attributable to IK.ATP would be in the range
of 1/5 (Fig 7D), and so other mechanisms must account
for the bulk of the observed K+
 loss. Other possible mechanisms of K+
 loss include changes in other currents during
metabolic impairment, activation of other K+
 channels
during ischemia (such as the Na+
-activated K+
 channel),
cotransport of lactate or Cl~ anions, or extracellular space
shrinkage, among others (see Reference 20 for a review).
The results obtained with the model are in partial disagreement with one experimental result, which suggests
that a degree of KATP channel activation of <0.5% would
account for the observed hypoxic/ischemic K+
 loss.14
However, the model predictions dealing with the participation of IK-ATP in ischemic K+
 loss agree nicely with other
reported experimental values regarding the partial prevention of K+
 loss in ischemia by glibenclamide. For example,
the data from Hicks and Cobbe46
 indicate that the glibenclamide-prevented extracellular K+
 accumulation during
30 minutes of global ischemia in rabbit septum reached
4.1 mmol/L, a value equivalent to an average AJefflux of
0.071 //mol-g"1
 -min"1
 (using the value VECW=0.52 L/kg
wet wt reported by Weiss et al30), which is in the range of
values predicted by our model (see Fig 7D). In a study by
Yan et al,4
 glibenclamide reduced K+
 efflux from 4.51 to
3.47 ^mol/g wet wt in a 15-minute period of hypoxia with
high [K+
]o. This yields a value of 0.069 /anol-g~1
-min~i
for the average AJefflux due to the glibenclamide-blocked
currents (mainly IK-ATP), which is again in accordance with
the predictions of the model.
Sensitivity of the Results to Model Parameters
One important issue regarding computer models that
must always be taken into consideration is the sensitivity
of the results to the values of the model parameters. In the
model of IK-ATP presented here, parameters are, in general,
well matched to experimental measurements. The parameter that shows the greatest dispersion when measured experimentally is the [ATP] of half-maximum inhibition of
the channel (Km in Equation 4).14'
26
 However, its value
does not influence our conclusions because the results are
presented in terms of fATP.
Another parameter that could have influence in the quantitative results, because it multiplies fATP in Equation 1, is the
KATP channel density (<r). The value chosen (3.8 channels/
lira2
, derived from Reference 14) lies in the middle of the
range of reported values for guinea pig ventricular myocytes.
Figures as low as 0.55 channel//xm2
 have been reported,47
and if this value were to be adopted, all the results regarding
the value of fATP should be multiplied by a factor of 7, so the
results of the present study would be compromised. However, all subsequent estimates of the parameter a yielded
considerably higher values. If the estimate of Nichols et al13
(^5 channels//um2
, which is the highest value reported for
guinea pig cardiac cells) is taken into consideration, the values of fATp given in the present study would actually be 1.3
times smaller (eg, fATp needed for a 50% reduction in APD
would now be 0.45%). Thus, all qualitative results would still
withstand this examination.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on July 29, 2024
Ferrero et al Model of the Cardiac ATP-Sensitive K+
 Current 219
As for the values obtained for K+
 efflux, Equation 6
shows that the results are critically dependent on the chosen VECW, which has a rather uncertain value. The value
chosen for VECW (0.52 L/kg wet wt) is typical for rabbit
septa.30
 Values as low as 0.2 have been reported for other
animal species. If this value of 0.2 L/kg wet wt was
adopted, the results obtained regarding K+
 efflux rates
would have been 66% higher. Even in this extreme case,
the simulated values of AJefflux would still be on the order
of 3 to 4 times lower than the reported experimental
results.
Appendix 1: Formulation of IK-ATP
General Equation
The general equation that describes the total current density
through the KATp channels is the following:
where a is the channel density, g0 is the unitary conductance, p0
is the maximum channel open probability (in the absence of
ATP), fATP is the fraction of open KATP channels, Vm is membrane
potential, and EK-ATP is the reversal potential.
The value chosen for the channel density was <r=3.8 channels/
jjm2
, and po was fixed at a value of 0.91.
Unitary Conductance
The expression for the conductance of a single fully open channel is as follows:
(9) go=yofMfNfT
The term y0 is the unitary conductance in the absence of intracellular Na+
 and Mg2+
 and depends on [K+
]o:
(10) yo=35.375 [K+
]o
5.4
where y0 is obtained in pS ([K+
]o in mmol/L).
The term fM in Equation 9 accounts for inward rectification
caused by intracellular Mg2+
 ions and is formulated by means of
a Hill equation:
(11) 1M—~
1
1 , [Mg2+],
^h.Mg
where the half-maximum saturation constant (KhMg) depends on
membrane potential and on [K + ] o :
(12)
with the value of the electrical distance (6Mg) being 0.32. F is the
Faraday constant, R is the gas constant, and T is the absolute
temperature. The factor K°hMll is given by the following:
(13) KhMg(
(both K\Me and [K+
]o in mmol/L).
The term fN in Equation 9 accounts for inward rectification
caused by intracellular Na+
 ions and is again formulated by
means of a Hill equation:
(14)
1
1 +
Na+
]
where the value of the half-maximum saturation constant (Kh_m)
depends on membrane voltage:
(15)
The value adopted for electrical distance (<5Na) is 0.35, whereas
AT\Na is 25.9 mmol/L.
Finally, the temperature (T) effect was introduced in Equation
9 according to the following expression:
(ID) IT(1)~V10
where Qlo, T, and To indicate temperature coefficient, absolute
temperature, and reference temperature, respectively, with
Q1()=1.3 and T0=36°C.
Fraction of Activated KATP Channels
In the model, the term fATp in Equation 8 depends on concentrations of intracellular ATP and of free cytosolic ADP, according
to the following expression:
(17)
1
l+([ATPy/CJH
where both the maximum-inhibition constant (Km) and the Hill
coefficient (H) depend on [ADP];. The equations that express
these dependencies are as follows:
(18) £m=35.8+17.9[ADP]i0256
(with Km in ^mol/L and [ADP]j in ^mol/L) and
(19) H=1.3+0.74exp(-0.09[ADP]i)
(with [ADP], in ^mol/L).
Reversal Potential
The reversal potential of the KATP channel (EK,ATP) is equal to the
equilibrium potential for K+
 and is thus given by the Nernst equation:
(20) RT
l
Appendix 2: Calculation of K+
 Efflux
Calculation of the Average K+
 Outward
Current Density
The total instantaneous K+
 current density (IK,T) through the
membrane is the sum of all the sarcolemmal currents carried by
K+
 ions. In the LR-II model, this is expressed as follows:
(21) lKT = IcaK+lK + lKI+lKp~2INaK-t~InsK + lK-ATP
Subtracting the inward current carried by the Na+
-K+
 pump from
the total K+
 current, we obtain the total outward K+
 current (IK,O)
:
The average outward current density (Iolll) was then calculated
as the integral mean value of IKiO:
(23) I, i r
lut~BCL Jn
Iicodt
Derivation of Equation 6
The K+
 efflux rate (JemUx) can be defined as the number of
moles of K+
 leaving the cell (noin) per unit time (At) and unit
tissue weight (Am):
(24) J efflux — . . .
AtAm
The number of moles of nou, can be related to the electric
charge carried by K+
 ions leaving the cell (Ql1ut) by means of the
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on July 29, 2024
220 Circulation Research Vol 79, No 2 August 1996
Faraday constant (nou,=Qoul/F). Along with this, Qollt is related to
the average K+
 outward current density (Iout) as
(25) Qou.=Iou.AmAt
where Am is the total membrane area of all the myocytes contained in the tissue of unit mass Am.
Rearranging the equations, we obtain the following:
(26) T -
J
 efflux FAm
Now the total membrane area (Am) can be related to the total
cell volume (Vcci) by means of the surface-to-volume ratio of
the myocyte (Sv): Am = Vce,-Sv. Moreover, Vce, can be expressed as the difference between the total tissue volume (Vt)
and the volume occupied by the extracellular water (Ve). Thus,
we obtain the following:
The term Am/V, in the previous equation is the tissue density
(p), and the term Ve/Am is the extracellular water content per
unit weight (VECw)- This yields the following:
(28)
Sv ( ~l
I o ut
Finally, if we want to express Jefflux in ^mol • g ' • min ' while
having Sv in ^m2
//im3
, F in coulomb/mol, p in g/crn3
, VFCW in
mL/g, and Iom in ^tA/cm2
, then a unit conversion factor of 600 000
is needed in Equation 25. The resultant equation is identical to
Equation 6 in the text.
Acknowledgments
This study was supported in part by the Conselleria de Educacion y Ciencia de la Generalitat Valenciana (Programa de Formacidn, Perfeccionamiento y Movilidad de Profesores e Investigadores 94/4158). The authors would like to thank Dr Vicente
Lopez Merino for helpful discussions.
References
I. Trautwein W, Gottstein U, Dudel J. Der aktionsstrom der myokardfaser im sauerstoffmangel. Pflugers Arch. 1954;260:40-60.
2. Wit AL, Janse MJ. The Ventricular Arrhythmias of Ischemia and
Infarction: Etectrophysiological Mechanisms. New York, NY: Futura Publishing Co Inc; 1993:86-87/207-208.
3. Morena H, Janse MJ, Fiolet JWT, Krieger WJG, Crijns H, Durrer D.
Comparison of the effects of regional ischemia, hypoxia, hyperkalemia and acidosis on intracellular and extracellular potentials and
metabolism in the isolated porcine heart. Circ Res. 1980;46:634-646.
4. Yan G-X, Yamada KA, Kleber AG, McHowat J, Corr PB. Dissociation between cellular K+
 loss, reduction in repolarization time, and
tissue ATP levels during myocardial hypoxia and ischemia. Circ Res.
1993;72:560-570.
5. Vleugels A, Vereecke J, Carmeliet E. Ionic currents during hypoxia in
voltage-clamped cat ventricular muscle. Circ Res. 1980:47:501-508.
6. Noma A. ATP-regulated K channels in cardiac muscle. Nature.
1983:305:147-148.
7. Elliot AC, Smith GL, Allen DG. Simultaneous measurements of action potential duration and intracellular ATP in isolated ferret hearts
exposed to cyanide. Circ Res. 1989:64:583-591.
8. De Lorenzi F, Cai S, Schanne OF, Ruiz-Petrich E. Partial contribution
of the ATP-sensitive K+
 current to the effects of mild metabolic depression in rabbit myocardium. Mol Cell Biochem. 1994:132:133-143.
9. Nakaya H, Takeda Y, Tohse N, Kanno M. Effects of ATP-sensitive
K+
 channel blockers on the action potential shortening in hypoxic
and ischaemic myocardium. Br J Pharmacol. 1991;103:1019-1026.
10. Cook DL, Satin LS, Ashford U, Hales N. ATP-sensitive K+
 channels
in pancreatic J-cells: spare-channel hypothesis. Diabetes. 1988:37:
495-498.
11. Faivre JF, Findlay I. Action potential duration and activation of ATPsensitive K+
 current in isolated guinea-pig ventricular myocytes.
Biochim Biophys Acta. 1990:1029:167-172.
12. Nichols CG, Lederer WJ. The regulation of ATP-sensitive K+
 channel activity in intact and permeabilized rat ventricular myocytes. J
Physiol (Lond). 1990;423:91-110.
13. Nichols CG, Ripoll C, Lederer WJ. ATP-sensitive potassium channel
modulation of the guinea pig ventricular action potential and contraction. Circ Res. 1991:68:280-287.
14. Weiss JN, Venkatesh N, Lamp ST. ATP-sensitive K+
 channels and
cellular K+
 loss in hypoxic and ischaemic mammalian ventricle. J
Physiol (Lond). 1992;447:649-673.
15. Gasser RNA, Vaughan-Jones RD. Mechanism of potassium efflux
and action potential shortening during ischaemia in isolated mammalian cardiac muscle. J Physiol (Lond). 1990;431:713-741.
16. Kantor PF, Coetzee WA, Carmeliet EE, Dennis SC, Opie LH. Reduction of ischemic K+
 loss and arrhythmias in rat hearts: effect of
glibenclamide, a sulfonylurea. Circ Res. 1990:66:478-485.
17. Wilde AAM, Escande D, Schumacher CA, Thuringer D, Mestre M,
Fiolet JWT, Janse MJ. Potassium accumulation in the globally ischemic mammalian heart: a role for the ATP-sensitive potassium
channel. Circ Res. 1990;67:835-843.
18. Vanheel G, De Hemptinne A. Influence of KAn> channel modulation
on net potassium efflux from ischaemic mammalian cardiac tissue.
Cardiovasc Res. 1992;26:1030-1039.
19. Wilde AAM, Schumacher C, Fiolet J, Opthof T, Janse MJ. Mere
opening of KATP channels does not contribute to accumulation of K+
in the globally ischemic rabbit heart. / Mol Cell Cardiol. 1992;
24(suppl I):S276. Abstract.
20. Wilde AAM, Aksnes G. Myocardial potassium loss and cell depolarisation in ischaemia and hypoxia. Cardiovasc Res. 1995:29:1-15.
21. Luo C-H, Rudy Y. A dynamic model of the cardiac ventricular action
potential, I: simulations of ionic currents and concentration changes.
Circ Res. 1994;74:1071-1096.
22. Kakei M, Noma A, Shibasaki T. Properties of adenosine-triphosphate-regulated potassium channels in guinea-pig ventricular cells. J
Physiol (Lond). 1985:363:441-462.
23. Horie M, Irisawa H, Noma A. Voltage-dependent magnesium block
of adenosine-triphosphate-sensitive potassium channel in guinea-pig
ventricular cells. J Physiol (Lond). 1987;387:251-272.
24. Trube G, Hescheler J. Inward-rectifying channels in isolated patches
of heart cell membrane: ATP-dependence and comparison with cellattached patches. Pflugers Arch. 1984;401:178-184.
25. Lederer WJ, Nichols CG. Nucleotide modulation of the activity of
rat heart ATP-sensitive K+
 channels in isolated membrane patches.
J Physiol (Lond). 1989:419:193-211.
26. Findlay I, Faivre JF. ATP-sensitive K channels in heart muscle: spare
channels. FEBS Lett. 1991;279:95-97.
27. Terzic A, Tung RT, Kurachi Y. Nucleotide regulation of ATP sensitive potassium channels. Cardiovasc Res. 1994:28:746-753.
28. Findlay I. Effects of ADP upon the ATP-sensitive K+
 channel in rat
ventricular myocytes. J Memhr Biol. 1988:101:83-92.
29. Mogul DJ, Singer DH, Ten Eick RE. Dependence of Na-K pump
current on internal Na in mammalian cardiac myocytes. Am J Physiol.
1990;259:H488-H496.
30. Weiss JN, Lamp ST, Shine Kl. Cellular K' loss and anion efflux
during myocardial ischemia and metabolic inhibition. Am J Physiol.
1989;256:H1165-H1175.
31. Gear CW. The automatic integration of stiff ordinary differential
equations. In: Morrel AJH, ed. Information Processing. Amsterdam,
Netherlands: North Holland; 1969.
32. Lederer WJ, Nichols CG, Smith GL. The mechanism of early contractive failure of isolated rat ventricular myocytes subjected to complete metabolic inhibition. / Physiol (Lond). 1989;413:329-349.
33. Borchgrevink PC, Bergan AS, Bakoy OE, Jynge P. Magnesium and
reperfusion of ischemic rat heart as assessed by 3'P-NMR. Am J Physiol. 1989;256:H195-H204.
34. Venkatesh N, Lamp ST, Weiss JN. Sulfonylureas, ATP-sensitive K+
channels, and cellular K+
 loss during hypoxia, ischemia, and metabolic inhibition in mammalian ventricle. Circ Res. 1991 ;69:623-637.
35. Kleber AG. Extracellular potassium accumulation in acute myocardial ischemia. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 1984;16:389-394.
36. Fan Z, Makielski JC. Intracellular H + and Ca+
 modulation of trypsinmodified ATP-sensitive K+
 channels in rabbit ventricular myocytes.
Circ Res. 1993;72:715-722.
37. Fan Z, Furukawa T, Sawanobori T, Makielski JC, Hiraoka M. Cytoplasmic acidosis induces multiple conductance states in ATP-sensitive potassium channels of cardiac myocytes. J Membr Biol. 1993;
136:169-179.
38. Terzic A, Findlay I, Hosoya Y, Kurachi Y. Dualistic behaviour of
ATP-sensitive K+
 channels toward intracellular nucleoside diphosphates. Neuron. 1994;12:1049-1058.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on July 29, 2024
Ferrero et al Model of the Cardiac ATP-Sensitive K + Current 221
39. Findlay I. ATP-sensitive K+
 channels in rat ventricular myocytes are
blocked and inactivated by internal divalent cations. Pflugers Arch.
1987;410:313-320.
40. Keung EC, Li Q. Lactate activates ATP-sensitive potassium channels
in guinea pig ventricular myocytes. 3 Clin Invest. 1991;88:1772-
1777.
41. Noble D. Oxsoft Heart Program Manual (Version 2.1'). Oxford, UK:
OXSOFTLtd; 1988.
42. Shaw R, Rudy Y. Electrophysiological changes of ventricular tissue
under ischemic conditions: a simulation study. Comp Cardiol. 1994;
16:641-644.
43. Agus ZS, Kelepouris E, Dukes I, Morad M. Cytosolic magnesium
modulates calcium channel activity in mammalian ventricular cells.
Am J Pkysiol. 1989;256:C452-C455.
44. Faivre JF, Findlay I. Effects of tolbutamide, glibenclamide and diazoxide upon action potentials recorded from rat ventricular muscle.
Biochim Biophys Ada. 1989;984:l-5.
45. Kodama I, Wilde AAM, Janse MJ, Durrer D, Yamada K. Combined
effects of hypoxia, hyperkalemia and acidosis on membrane action
potential and excitability of guinea-pig ventricular muscle. J Mol Cell
Cardiol 1984,16:247-259.
46. Hicks MN, Cobbe SM. Effect of glibenclamide on extracellular potassium accumulation and the electrophysiological changes during
myocardial ischaemia in the arterially perfused interventricular septum of rabbit. Cardiovasc Res. 1991:25:407-413.
47. Noma A, Shibasaki T. Membrane current through adenosine-triphosphate-regulated potassium channels in guinea-pig ventricular cells. J
Physiol (Lond). 1985;363:463-480.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on July 29, 2024



208
Simulation of Action Potentials From
Metabolically Impaired Cardiac Myocytes
Role of ATP-Sensitive K+
 Current
Jose M. Ferrero, Jr, Javier Saiz, Jose M. Ferrero, Nitish V. Thakor
Abstract The role of the ATP-sensitive K+
 current (IK-ATP)
and its contribution to electrophysiological changes that occur
during metabolic impairment in cardiac ventricular myocytes is
still being discussed. The aim of this work was to quantitatively
study this issue by using computer modeling. A model of IK_ATP
is formulated and incorporated into the Luo-Rudy ionic model of
the ventricular action potential. Action potentials under different
degrees of activation of IK-ATP are simulated. Our results show
that in normal ionic concentrations, only »0.6% of the KATP
channels, when open, should account for a 50% reduction in action potential duration. However, increased levels of intracellular
Mg2+
 counteract this shortening. Under conditions of high [K+
]o,
such as those found in early ischemia, the activation of only
=0.4% of the KATP channels could account for a 50% reduction
I
t is well known that myocardial hypoxia and ischemia
cause profound changes in the electrophysiological
properties of cardiac tissue. One of the major
changes that occur in ventricular muscle cells during
metabolic impairment is shortening of the AP.' The reduction of APD initially causes a shortening of the refractory period,2
 and this can facilitate the appearance of
reentrant-type arrhythmias.2
 The reduction of APD during ischemia can partly be explained by an increased
[K+
]O,
3
'
4
 but additional factors seem to be involved in AP
shortening. Indeed, during hypoxic perfusion, the AP is
known to shorten in the absence of extracellular K+
accumulation.l>5
Since KATP channels were first described by Noma,6
their contribution to the shortening of the AP during hypoxia and ischemia and to other electrophysiological
changes has been debated and is still not completely clarified. The major argument against the role of the KATp
channels during early ischemia is that the value of [ATP]j
needed to open 50% of the channels is two orders of
magnitude below the measured [ATP]i bulk level in the
first phase of ischemia.7
 Thus, the fraction of channels
activated during early ischemia is likely to be very low,
and from this point of view, the current carried by KATp
channels (IK-ATP) might not seem to contribute signifiReceived November 27, 1995; accepted May 10, 1996. From the Laboratorio Integrado de B»oingenieria (J.M.F. Jr, J.S., J.M.F.), Departamento de Ingeniena Electronica, Universidad Poli- tecnica de Valencia, Valencia, Spain, and the Department of Bio- medical Engineering (J.M.F. Jr, J.S., N.V.T.), The Johns Hopkins Ur. ersity, Baltimore, Md.
Reprint requests to Dr Jose Maiia Ferrero, Jr, Laboratorio Integrado de Bioingenieria, Universidad Politecnica de Valencia, Camino de Vera s/n, 46020 Valencia, Spain. E-mail cferrero@pleiades.upv.es.
© 1996 American Heart Association, Inc.
in action potential duration. Thus, our results suggest that opening
of IK-ATP channels should play a significant role in action potential
shortening during hypoxic/ischemic episodes, with the fraction
of open channels involved being very low (<1%). However, the
results of the model suggest that activation of IK-ATP alone does
not quantitatively account for the observed K+
 efflux in metabolically impaired cardiac myocytes. Mechanisms other than
KATP channel activation should be responsible for a significant
part of the K+
 efflux measured in hypoxic/ischemic situations.
(Circ Res. 1996;79:208-221.)
Key Words • computer model • ATP-regulated channels
• myocardial ischemia • action potential shortening • K+
efflux
cantly to the AP shortening and other ischemia-related
electrophysiological changes.4
'
7
 Moreover, because IKATP
channel blockers, such as glibenclamide, only partially
prevent hypoxic/ischemic AP shortening, it has been suggested that currents other than IK.ATp must significantly
contribute to APD reduction.89
On the other hand, it has also been suggested that only
a small number of KATp channels need to be activated to
account for the changes observed in AP configuration.
Following this "spare-channel hypothesis" suggested by
Cook et al,10
 several investigators have found indirect
experimental evidence that supports this idea in the case
of cardiac myocytes.11"
14
 However, because of the difficulty of experimentally measuring the fraction of open
KATP channels directly, there is still no direct proof of this
hypothesis, and the quantitative importance of IK-ATP
channel opening in hypoxic/ischemic episodes is not yet
completely established.
The contribution of IK-ATP to cellular K+
 loss during
hypoxic/ischemic situations is not clear either. There exists experimental evidence that supports the idea that IK-ATP
channel activation largelyl415
 or partially1617
 accounts for
K+
 loss from the cell in the first minutes of a hypoxic/
ischemic episode. However, the ineffectiveness of K+
channel openers to enhance the rate of K+
 loss1819
 and
the dissociation between K+
 efflux, AP shortening, and
intracellular ATP levels in hypoxia/ischemia,4
 among
others,20
 are reasons against a major role of IK ATP in this
phenomenon.
The main gc )1 of the present study was to use a computer model to quantitatively study the influence of IK-ATP
on changes in AP configuration and cellular K+
 loss in
metabolically impaired conditions. For this purpose, we
have formulated a detailed model of this current and have
incorporated it into the LR-II model21
 of the guinea pigDownloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on July 29, 2024
Ferrero et al Model of the Cardiac ATP-Sensitive K+
 Current 209
Selected Abbreviations and Acronyms
AP = action potential
APD = AP duration
BCL = basic cycle length
fATP = fraction of open KATP channels
IK.O = total outward K+
 current
•K,T = total K+
 current
IK-ATP = ATP-sensitive K+
 current
IKR = sum of K+
 currents not including IKATP
IKI = inward rectifier K+
 current
Jetdux = K+
 unidirectional efflux rate
AJeidux = net increment in K+
 unidirectional
efflux rate
KATP channel = ATP-sensitive K+
 channel
LR-II model = phase II Luo-Rudy model
VECW = extracellular water volume
Vm = membrane potential
type ventricular cardiac AP. We use this model to study
the relationship between APD and intracellular nucleotide
levels and ionic concentrations. The influence of IK.ATP
activation on reduction of APD during ischemia in the
presence of high [K+
]o has been theoretically elucidated.
Finally, the contribution of IK-ATP to the increase in the
rate of K+
 efflux in hypoxia/ischemia is also theoretically
investigated.
Materials and Methods
Model of IK-ATP
General Considerations
The mathematical model of IK-ATP that we formulate here is
based on different sets of published experimental data describing
the dependence of the channel current density on ion concentrations ([K+
]o, [Mg2+]h and [Na+
]j) and intracellular nucleotide
levels ([ATP]; and [ADP],). The parameters of the model are estimated, when necessary, using a linear least-squares method to
fit the experimental data. The complete set of equations of the
model is given in Appendix 1.
Current Density
The general equation describing the current density
is as follows:
(1) fATp( V m — EK.ATp)
where a is the channel density, g0 is the unitary conductance
of a fully activated individual channel, po is the open probability of a channel in the absence of ATP, fATP is the fraction
of activated channels (relative current), and Vm is the
membrane potential. The term EK.ATP is the reversal potential
of the channel, which is equal to the Nernst potential of K +
ions22
 because of the specificity of the channel to K+
 ions in
cardiac muscle cells.
We have used in our simulations a value of 3.8 channels//jm2
for the channel density (derived from data in Reference 14), a
value that is intermediate in the range of reported values for
guinea pig ventricular myocytes. The open probability in the absence of ATP was assumed to be 0.91.17
 The sensitivity of the
results to these parameters is discussed later.
Unitary Conductance
The expression for the unitary conductance (g0) of an individual KATp channel is as follows:
(2) L, Vm, T)=
for the inward rectification of the channel, and fT is a nondimensional temperature (T)-dependent factor.
The value of y0 is known to depend on [K+
],,.22-
23
 In the
present model, we have used the formulation provided in Reference 22 (see Equation 10 of Appendix 1), which is widely
accepted. On the other hand, KATP channels show inward rectification.2223
 This property is the result of a voltage-dependent block caused by Na+
 and Mg!f
 ions and obeys the laws
of saturation kinetics.23
 We used this approach to express both
factors fM (for Mg2+) and fN (for Na+
) in Equation 2 by means
of Hill-type equations (see Equations 11 and 14 in Appendix
1). The half-maximal saturation constants (Khmn) are given by
Eyring rate theory:
(3) exp Vn
where the subscript "ion" stands for Mg2+
 and Na
 +
 , respectively, K°hjm is the value of Khion at zero membrane voltage,
fiion is
 tn e
 electrical distance, zion is the valence of the considered ion, F is the Faraday constant, R is the gas constant, and
T is the absolute temperature. The values of the parameters
used in our simulations and the details of the equations are
listed in Appendix 1.
It is known that increasing levels of extracellular K+
 partially
remove the voltage-dependent block caused by Mg2+
 ions.23
 This
fact was considered in our model by making Ko
h_Mg increase
monotonically with [K+
]o following a square-root dependence
(see Equation 13 in Appendix 1) to fit data from Horie et al.23
Finally, a temperature-dependent term, fT, was introduced by
using a temperature coefficient Qio= 1 -3 (see Equation 16 in Appendix I).23
Fig 1A illustrates the results obtained with the model of the
unitary conductance in terms of the current-voltage relationships
of the channel. The symbols in both plots represent experimental
values corresponding to different values of [K+
](, (data duplicated
from Reference 24). The solid lines represent the curves predicted
by the model.
Nucleotide Dependence
It is well known that when intracellular ATP molecules bind
to the channel protein, it becomes inactivated. Thus, fATP in a
myocyte strongly depends on [ATPJi. Experimental data612142526
are properly fitted by means of a Hill-type equation:
(4) 1
l+([ATP],/£m)
H
where y0 is the unitary conductance in the absence of intracellular
Na +
 and Mg2 +, fM and fN are nondimensional factors that account
where Km is the half-maximum inhibition constant and H is the
Hill coefficient.
Several factors related to the metabolic state of the cell modulate the [ATP], dependence of fATp (for a review, see Reference
27). Among them, free cytosolic ADP is known to stimulate partially inactivated channels in the presence of Mg2+.
14-
2528
 Both
the half-maximal inhibition constant (Km) and the Hill coefficient
of Equation 4 are dependent on free [ADP]j. Using the data reported by Weiss et al,14
 we have modeled the dependence of fATp
on [ADP]i. Specifically, we used the average values of Km and
Hill coefficients for individual membrane patches obtained by
Weiss et al for different values of [ADP1,. The mathematical expressions that result from the best fit are given in Appendix 1
(see Equations 18 and 19); they show a monotonic increase of
Km and a monotonic decrease of the Hill coefficient with [ADPJ,,
respectively.
The fraction of open channels will depend, in this way, on
intracellular concentrations of both ATP and ADP. Fig IB graphically illustrates this dependence in an appropriate way to easily
relate nucleotide levels to fA]P values. Indeed, these curves can
be used to "translate" a given value of fATP to the different combinations of [ATP];-[ADPJ,, which, when present in the cell, give
rise to such a value of fATp. Each curve in the figure can be regarded, then, as an "isoactivation" curve for IK ATPDownloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on July 29, 2024
210 Circulation Research Vol 79, No 2 August 1996
Model of the Ventricular AP
Once the model for IK-ATP was formulated, we incorporated
it into the LR-II model described by Luo and Rudy.21
 This
mathematical model reproduces the AP of endocardial ventricular myocytes of guinea pig-type hearts with a high degree
of electrophysiological detail. It includes mathematical descriptions of 12 different ionic currents, as well as intracellular
Ca 2+
 buffering and the Ca2+-induced Ca 2 +
 release process.
The basic equation that relates Vm to ionic currents is the
following:
Normal Ionic Concentrations
(5)
dV
- ^
at
where Cm is the membrane capacitance, Istim is the stimulus
current, and ZIion is the sum of all the ionic currents that cross
the sarcolemma, namely, the fast Na+
 current (INa), the current
S 8 fl i A
(mmol/L)
1—i—i—i—I—i—
-100 -80 -60 -40 -20 0 20 40
Vm(mV)
0.1 %
0.3%
' I " ' I " ' I 1
 "
0 20 40 60 80 100120140160180 200
[ADP], (umol/L)
FIG 1. Characteristics of KATP channels considered in the model.
A, Single-channel current-voltage relationships for the KATp channel. In this figure, IK-ATP is the current through a single fully activated channel. Symbols indicate experimental values (duplicated from Fig 6A in Reference 24); solid lines are simulation
results. Each plot corresponds to a different value of [K+
]o. Intracellular concentrations of Na+
, K+
, and Mg2+
 are 8, 140, and
3.1 mmol/L, respectively. B, fATP as a function of [ATP]; and [ADP];.
Equations 4,12, and 13 were used to generate these plots. Each
curve corresponds here to a certain value of fATP (indicated in
percentage above each curve).
Ion
Na+
Ca2
-
K+
Mg2
~
Concentration, mmol/L
Intracellular
10
0.12X1CT3
145
0.5
Extracellular
140
1.8
5.4
Bulk
140
1.8
5.4
through the L-type Ca 2 +
 channels (ICa,t).* the delayed rectifier
K+
 current (IK), the inward rectifier K+
 current (IK1), the plateau K+
 current (IKp), the Na + -Ca 2 +
 exchanger current (INaca).
the Na + -K+
 pump current (INaK), a nonspecific Ca2+-activated
K+
 and Na +
 current (Ins), and the current carried by the sarcolemmal Ca 2 +
 pump (Ip(ca))- Mathematical details of this
model can be found elsewhere.21
In our simulations, extracellular ionic concentrations were
held constant, unless otherwise noted (see "Extracellular K +
Accumulation" below). Intracellular concentrations changed
dynamically as a result of ionic fluxes through the sarcolemma. The normal values of extracellular concentrations and
initial intracellular concentrations are listed in the Table. All
simulations correspond to a temperature of 37°C.
Stimulation Protocol
In each simulation, unless otherwise noted (see "Extracellular
K+
 Accumulation" below), constant values were assigned to each
relevant parameter of the model (ie, fATP and ionic concentrations), and in these conditions, the cell was stimulated with a
constant BCL. In order to achieve steady state conditions and to
avoid alternants in APD, 10 APs were elicited before recording
the data. The stimulus consisted of rectangular current pulses 2
ms in duration and an amplitude 1.5 times the diastolic threshold.
APD
We defined APD in our simulations as the interval between
the instant of maximum upstroke velocity of the AP, [dV/dt]max,
and the instant of 90% repolarization.
Calculation of JeraUx
When calculating the rate of K+
 efflux from the cell, the basic
LR-II model was slightly modified so as to achieve zero net K +
efflux under basal normoxic conditions. Specifically, the maximum current density through the Na + -K+
 pump was increased
from 1.5 to 2.61 fiA/pF, which is still in the range of measured
values.29
 This change affects AP morphology only slightly (small
decrease of APD due to accelerated repolarization).
To compute Jefllux, we started by subtracting the K+
 (inward)
current carried by the Na + -K+
 pump from the total K+
 current
(IK,T) to obtain the total outward K+
 current (IK,o)- Taking into
account the 3:2 stoichiometry of the pump, this results in
lK,o=lK,T+2INaK (where INaK is the Na + -K+
 pump current). We
then calculated the average outward current density (Iout) as the
integral mean value of IK,o- In order to compare the simulation
results with experimental data, the current density value was
translated to Jefflux (in (/mal-g^-mm'1
) using the following
expression:
600000/1 \
(o) Jefflux— ^ I — VE Cw )SvIOut
F \P I
The assumed values of the parameters in Equation 6 were p= 1
kg/L for the myocardial density, VECW=0.52 L/kg wet wt for the
*Note that the correct formulation of the term fx, which appears
in the L-type Ca2+
 current formulation, is given in the text of the
article by Luo and Rudy21
 (page 1073) and not in the list of equations
at the end of said article.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on July 29, 2024
Ferrero et al Model of the Cardiac ATP-Sensitive K+
 Current 211
extracellular water content,30
 and Sv=0.3 ^varlfjm3
 for the surface-to-volume ratio of the myocyte. F stands for the Faraday
constant. Details about derivation of Equation 6 can be found in
Appendix 2.
Finally, AJefllux was calculated as the difference between the
actual value of Jefflux and its control value (corresponding to
fATP=0%).
Extracellular K+
 Accumulation
We also carried out long simulations in which extracellular K+
accumulation was studied. In these simulations, the cell was
paced with a BCL of 800 ms, and fATp was either abruptly or
gradually increased. Extracellular concentrations were permitted
to change dynamically as a result of ionic fluxes through the
cellular membrane. A three-compartment model was assumed,
and diffusion of ions from the extracellular cleft to the bulk extracellular medium was considered. Thus, ionic concentrations in
the cleft can be described by the following equation:
A.
d[S]o
dt VECW z sF
l
 v«E
p
T
Us.total
where [S]o and [S]buik are the concentrations of the ionic species
S in the extracellular cleft and in the bulk extracellular medium,
respectively. The term zs is the valence of the ionic species S,
and Is.totai stands for the total current through the sarcolemma
carried by the ionic species S. Finally, rdiff (1 s) is the time constant associated with the diffusion of ions from the cleft to the
bulk extracellular medium.
When simulating extracellular K+
 accumulation during noflow ischemia, the diffusion term in Equation 7 was omitted (rdiff)
to account for the lack of flow.
The modified version of the Na+
-K+
 pump in the LR-II model
was also used in the simulations (see "Calculation of Jefnux"
above).
Computation Methods
Programs were written in ACSL language using Gear stiff algorithm31
 to solve the nonlinear system of differential equations
that results from the AP model. Simulations were carried out in
a SUN SparcStation 1 using double-precision variables. To ensure numerical accuracy, the maximum allowed time step was 10
fis. The maximum relative error allowed for every variable in
each iteration was 10 ~6
.
Results
In all the simulations that are presented in this section,
fATP is varied, and the effect of this variation on AP configuration, ionic currents, and K+
 efflux is investigated. A
given value of fATP can be related to [ATP]i and [ADP];
using the isoactivation curves shown in Fig IB.
Effects of KATP Channel Opening on AP
Configuration and Ionic Currents
The effects of the progressive activation of IK-ATP °n the
characteristics of the ventricular AP were first investigated
using normal nonischemic values for the ionic concentrations. The values used are listed in the Table.
Fig 2 shows the results of these simulations. In Fig 2A,
a set of APs that correspond to different values of fATP is
shown. It can be noted that AP configuration varies significantly when KATP channels become activated, even
with very low values of fArp. When fATP increases, there is
a marked reduction in APD, a moderate reduction of the
plateau potential, and a slight diastolic hyperpolarization.
Resting Vm, whose value is —86.5 mV in control
(fATP=0%) conditions, decreases almost linearly to reach
a value of -87.1 mV for fATP=2.5%. This would be in
50 i
0 -
-50-
-100 J
. 2.5%
1.0%
100 ms
0.0
C.
1
2 - i
n —u
8 -
6 "
4 -
2 -
n —
<
2.5%
zi.0%
0.6%
\ r 04%
\ y , 0.2%
XTV/ 0.1%
100 ms
FIG 2. Results of the model under conditions of normal ionic
concentrations (see Table). A, Simulated APs for different values
of fATP (numbers indicated, in percentage, for each curve). The
cell was electrically stimulated with a BCL of 800 ms. B, Normalized APD as a function of fATP for two different BCLs (475
and 800 ms). APD is normalized in each case to its control value
(184.1 ms for BCL=800 ms, and 175.2 ms for BCL=475 ms),
which corresponds to fATP=0%. C, Time course of the total K+
current crossing the sarcolemma (IK,T, calculated as the net sum
of all K+
 currents carried by sarcolemmal K+
 channels and
pumps) for different degrees of KATP channel activation. The same
BCL as in panel A was used.
accordance with the slight diastolic hyperpolarization observed by Gasser and Vaughan-Jones 1 5
 in myocytes exposed to hypoxic conditions, although other studies have
reported opposite results. 3 2
 The cell becomes completely
unexcitable for f ATP ^3.1 % for the standard stimulus used
in the simulations (not shown).
The reduction in APD caused by increasing activation
of IK-ATP is represented in Fig 2B, in which the results
corresponding to two different BCLs are compared. For
each BCL, the APD has been normalized to its maximum
value, which corresponds to the complete inactivation of
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on July 29, 2024
212 Circulation Research Vol 79, No 2 August 1996
the KATP channels. For a BCL of 800 ms, the figure shows
how the activation of ^0.6% of the total population of
channels is sufficient to account for a 50% shortening in
APD. This figure increases to »0.7% when the pacing
frequency is increased to a BCL of 475 ms.
The value of fATP needed to shorten APD to half its
control value is in accordance with several experimental
results.111314
 Moreover, the rate of change of APD with
fATp agrees very nicely with indirect experimental findings
by Nichols and Lederer.12
Activation of IK.ATP modifies the ionic sarcolemmal currents
significantly. Fig 2C shows the evolution of the total K+
 current (IKJ-) as activation of IK.ATP progresses. The total time during which the K+
 currents are flowing shortens in correspondence with the reduction in APD. Both the maximum peak of
IK,T and the amplitude of the K+
 current "plateau" increase
with fATP. The secondary peak of the K+
 current in phase 3,
mainly due to activation of the time-independent IK1, also increases, although only slightly, with fATP.
Fig 3 depicts the relative contributions of IK-ATP and the rest
of the sarcolemmal K+
 currents to IKJ-. The time courses of IK_
ATP and of the sum of all the other K+
 currents (IK.R) are compared for six different values of fATP. The shape of IK-ATP is
 a
distorted version of the AP waveform, due to the inward rectification of the KATP channels, and presents a plateau whose
level is proportional to the degree of channel activation. Regarding IK.R, both the initial peak during depolarization (due
mainly to the plateau K+
 current and to IK1) and the secondary
peak during repolarization (due basically to IKi) are practically
independent of fATP. Opening of KATP channels significantly
depresses the plateau of IKR. It is noticeable that for degrees
of KATP channel activation over 0.4%, the overall contribution
of IK-ATP to IKT is higher than the contribution of all the rest of
the K+
 currents added together.
Effects of Changes on Ionic Concentrations
In the next set of simulations, [Mg2+]j, [Na+
]i; and [K+
]o
are varied in turn while the other ionic concentrations remain at their control levels (see the Table). The effects of
changes in these concentrations, which modulate the activity of the KATP channels, on AP configuration and APD
are further investigated.
Changes in [Mg2+]t
Myoplasmic free Mg2+, which partially blocks KATp
channels in a voltage-dependent fashion, is known to increase from its control level (»0.5 mmol/L) to «2.5
mmol/L in 6 to 9 minutes of global ischemia.33
 To investigate the effects of increased intracellular Mg2+
 level on
AP configuration, we simulated APs under different KATP
channel activation degrees for three different [Mg2+]; levels. The results are shown in Fig 4. Each of the six sets of
APs plotted in Fig 4A corresponds to a fixed value of fATP.
It can be seen that increased levels of intracellular Mg2+
partially counteract the AP shortening caused by IK-ATPHigh [Mg2+]j also elevates the AP plateau level because
of the enhanced inward rectification of the KATP channels.
The relationship between normalized APD and fATP for
different [Mg2+]i levels is plotted in Fig 4B. Note that the
effect of intracellular Mg2+
 on APD is more significant at
higher values of fATp- The fraction of channels needed to
be activated to reduce APD to 50% rises from »0.6% for
[Mg2+],=0.5 mmol/L to »0.8% for [Mg2+], = 1.5 mmol/L
and «1.0% for [Mg2+];=2.5 mmol/L. The current through
KATP channels at Vm=0 mV is reduced from 80% to 46%
of the maximum possible current when [Mg2+], increases
from 0.5 to 2.5 mmol/L. According to these results, the
effect of an increased intracellular Mg2+
 level during hypoxia/ischemia has a considerable effect on APD, reducing
the KATP-mediated shortening of the AP.
Changes in [Na +]t
Next, we investigated the effects of increased levels of
intracellular Na+
. APs corresponding to different values
of [Na+
]j and different values of fATP are shown in Fig 5A.
Changes in [Na+
]; have two different effects on AP configuration. The first one is independent of KATP channels
and is due to the dependence on [Na+
]; exhibited by several ionic channels, pumps, and exchangers in the sarcolemma.21
 This direct effect tends to shorten the AP when
intracellular levels of Na+
 rise, even in the absence of KATP
channel activation. Fig 5B, which shows the dependence
of APD on fATP for three different values of [Na+
]j, illustrates this phenomenon. All APDs are referred to the value
that corresponds to fATP=0% and [Na+
]i=10 mmol/L.
Note, indeed, that for any constant value of fATp, AP shortens as [Na+
]j increases. On the other hand, as discussed
previously, intracellular Na+
 causes a partial voltage-dependent block in KATp channels. This would tend to reduce
the AP shortening caused by IK-ATP activation, as happens
with intracellular Mg2+. To further investigate this effect,
8 -
6 -
4 -
2 -
0 —
8 -
6 -
4 -
2 -
fATP = 0.1 % fAW-0.2%
100 ms
1
X
—Jv
fAW-1.0%
L. J
fATP = 0.4%
fATP = 2.5%
c >
[ ]^ —
FIG 3. Time course of K+
 currents
for different values of fA-rp- Ionic concentrations are listed in the Table.
O indicates IK.ATP; • , lKfl.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on July 29, 2024
Ferrero et al Model of the Cardiac ATP-Sensitive K+
 Current 213
A.
50 -i
B -50
-100
fATP=0.2%
50 -i
>a
-50
-100
L fATp- 1.0 1.0%%
2.5 mmol/L
5 mmol/L
0.5 mmol/L
[Mg2
*]i (mmol/L)
' ' ' I ' ' n I ' ' I ' ' ' 1
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0
fAW (%)
FIG 4. Effect of intracellular Mg2+
levels on AP configuration. A BCL
of 800 ms was used in the simulations. Ionic concentrations other
than [Mg2+]| are listed in the Table.
A, Simulated APs corresponding to
different degrees of KATP channel
activation (values of fATP are indicated above each set). The longest
of the three APs on each panel corresponds to [Mg2+]i=2.5 mmol/L;
the central one, to 1.5 mmol/L; and
the shortest one, to 0.5 mmol/L. B,
Normalized APD as a function of
fATP for three different values of
[Mg2+]i. Control value of APD
(100% level) is 184.1 ms.
we constructed Fig 5C by normalizing APD values in a
different way. Each value of APD corresponding to a
given level of intracellular Na+
 was normalized to the
maximum APD value (corresponding to fATP=0%) found
under that particular [Na+
](. In this way, the direct effect
of intracellular Na+
 previously mentioned is eliminated,
while the KATP-dependent effect is maintained and amplified. When APD values are normalized in this manner, it
can be seen (Fig 5C) that all the curves (APD versus fATP)
fall reasonably well on a single curve, with maximum differences in APD values being in the range of 5% for all
values of fATP. This means that the effect of [Na+
], on APD
mediated by KATP channels is very small in the range of
[Na+
]i tested. Note that the current through KATP channels
at Vm=0 mV is reduced from 87% to 63% of the maximum
possible current when [Na+
]j is increased from 10 to 20
mmol/L, which is much less significant than the reduction
caused by Mg2+.
Changes in [K+
]o
Increases in [K+
]o that take place in ischemic episodes
are known to profoundly affect APD. The effects of high
[K+
]o on APD are mediated in part by an increase in the
conductance of both the inward rectifier (gKi) and the delayed rectifier (gK) channels, something which tends to decrease APD. Similarly, [K+
]o is also known to affect the
conductance of KATP channels in a similar manner.22
We used the model to investigate the effect of [K+
]o
on AP configuration for different degrees of activation of
IK ATP- Fig 6 depicts the results obtained. The upper left
APs in Fig 6A correspond to complete inactivation of
IK-ATP, and it is seen, as expected, how APD reduces in
response to increases in [K+
]o. APs also exhibit diastolic
depolarization, which is due to the increase in [K+
]o. The
other five sets of APs in Fig 6A show the effects of the
progressive activation of IK-ATP on AP configuration. As
fATp increases, APD is further decreased, resting Vm is
scarcely affected, and the absolute influence of [K+
]o on
APD is reduced.
Fig 6B shows the effect of [K+
]o on the APD-fATP dependence. APD values are normalized to the reference
value corresponding to fATP=0% and [K+
]O=5.4 mmol/L.
The fraction of open KATP channels needed to produce a
50% reduction in APD is reduced from =»0.6% to 0.55%,
0.48%, and 0.38% as [K+
]o increases from 5.4 mmol/L to
7.5, 9.5, and 11.5 mmol/L, respectively.
However, if we normalize the values of APD for each
value of [K+
]o to their control value (fATP=0%) corresponding to that particular [K+
]o, the results are different.
As illustrated in Fig 6C, the relative reduction of APD
normalized in this way is independent of [K+
]o (all the
points fall reasonably well in one single curve). These
results suggest that both high [K+
]o and KATP channel
activation tend to reduce APD, but the effects of these
two factors seem to be independent of one another. Indeed, Fig 6C shows that for any value of [K+
]o in the
range of early ischemia, «0.6% of the total population
of channels, when open, always cause a 50% reduction
in APD from its control value independently of [K+
]o.
Similarly (although not shown in the figures), for a fixed
value of fATP in the range of 0% to 2.5%, APD is reduced
to 76% of its control value when [K+
]o increases from
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on July 29, 2024
214 Circulation Research Vol 79, No 2 August 1996
A.
50-,
>S
 -50
-100
50
i~ o H
>6
-50
-100 - 1
18mmol/L
15 mmo
10 mmol/L
= 0.6%
FIG 5. Effects of intracellular
Na+
 on APD. A, Simulated APs
corresponding to different degrees of KATp channel activation
(values of fATp are indicated
above each set). The longest of
the three APs on each panel corresponds to [Na+
],=10 mmol/L;
the central one, to 15 mmol/L;
and the shortest one, to 18 mmol/
L. B, Normalized APD as a function of fATP for three different values of [Na+
],. Control values of
APD for each [Na+
]i, corresponding to fATP=0%, are 184.1 ms
([Na+
]i=1u mmol/L, 100% reference value), 161.4 ms ([Na+
],=
15 mmol/L), and 132.2 ms
([Na+
]i=20 mmol/L). The cell was
stimulated with a BCL of 800 ms.
Ionic concentrations other than
[Na^]i are listed in the Table. C,
Same data as in panel B but normalized with a different criterion.
For each value of [Na+
],, the normalized APD was referred to the
corresponding control value
specified above.
o.o
5.4 to 11.5 mmol/L, independently of the value of fATp
considered.
Fig 6B can also be used to compare the separate effects
of high [K ¥]a and KATP channel activation on AP shortening. It is seen that in the range of values chosen for [K+
](,
and fATP, the effect of KATP channel activation on AP shortening under conditions of normal [K+
]o is more pronounced than that of extracellular K+
 accumulation alone.
In the absence of KATP channel activation, typical early
ischemic levels of [K+] o of 11 to 12 mmol/L16
 shorten the
APD to «75% of its control value. On the other hand,
activation of 0.6% of the total population of KATp channels,
which might be a typical value in early ischemia (see
"Discussion" and Reference 14), reduces APD to «50%
in the presence of normal K+
 levels.
Cellular K+
 Loss
It is a well-known phenomenon that cardiac myocytes
lose K+
 during metabolically impaired situations. In ischemic episodes, K+
 loss begins at —15 s after the onset
of ischemia, and net K+
 efflux rate reaches a peak value
in the range of 0.3 to 0.5 /v,mol/(g-min).416
 In substratefree hypoxia, net K+
 loss averages 0.54 to 0.60 fjmoil
(g • min).1434
 Finally, net K+
 efflux rate seems to be higher,
^0.9 /imol/(g • min) in hypoxia with glucose present.4
The model presented here can be used to quantify the
K+
 loss caused by the activation of IK ATP- For this purpose,
we simulate APs for different pacing frequencies and different [K+] o levels and quantify Jefflux and AJcfflux using
Equation 6 (see "Materials and Methods").
Fig 7A shows the magnitude of AJefflux (shown as AJT
in Fig 7) as a function of fATP for two different values of
BCL. As depicted in the figure, net increment in K+
 loss
shows a biphasic behavior with KATP channel activation.
Indeed, AJefflux initially increases with fATp, reaching a
maximum value of 0.08 /Ltmol-g^'-mkr1
 (BCL=800ms)
or 0.16 jumol-g ' -min"1
 (BCL=475 ms) for fATPof »1% .
From this point, AJefflux decreases as IK-ATP is further increased and even becomes negative for fATP >2.25%
(BCL=800 ms) or 2.75% (BCL=475 ms).
The level of extracellular K+
 modulates the rate of K+
 loss
from the cell, as demonstrated in Fig 7B, in which AJefflux is
plotted against fATP for two different values of [K+
]o. It is
noticeable how the maximum AJ,.fflux decreases when [K+
]o
increases (0.081 //mol-g^'-min"1
 for [K+
L=5.4 mmol/L,
0.044 ^mol-g- 1
 -min"1
 for [K+
]O=8.5 mmol/L). The degree
of KATP channel opening for which the maximum takes place
is also reduced (0.8% for [K+
]O=5.4 mmol/L, 0.7% for
[K+
JO=8.5 mmol/L). Thus, in ischemic situations in which
extracellular K+
 accumulation takes place, cellular K+
 loss
through the KATP channels would be even smaller.
The rate of cellular K+
 loss mediated by IK-ATP obtained
with the model is significantly lower than the values of
total K+
 efflux found experimentally. Panels C and D of
Fig 7 compare the simulation results with experimental
measures of K+
 loss in different situations.41416-
34
 In Fig
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on July 29, 2024
Ferrero et al Model of the Cardiac ATP-Sensitive K+
 Current 215
A.
50 -|
I
-100 -1
50
I 0
11.5 mmol/L'
9.5 mmol/L
7.5 mmol/L
5.4 mmol/L
>S
-50
-100 - 1
0.0 2.0
FIG 6. Effect of extracellular IC
levels on AP configuration. Ionic
concentrations other than [K+
]o
are listed in the Table. A BCL of
800 ms was used in the simulations. A, Simulated APs corresponding to different degrees of
KATp channel activation (values
of fATP are indicated above each
set). The longest of the four APs on
each panel corresponds to
[K+
]O=5.4 mmol/L; the central
ones, to 7.5 mmol/L and 9.5 mmol/
L; and the shortest one, to 11.5
mmol/L. B, Normalized APD as a
function of fATP for different values
of [K+
]o. Control values of APD for
each [K+
]o, corresponding to
fATp=0%, are 184.1 ms ([K-]O=5.4
mmol/L, 100% reference value),
165.4 ms ([K+
]O=7.5 mmol/L),
152.9 ms ([K+
]O=9.5 mmol/L), and
140.3 ms ([K+
]o=11.5 mmol/L). C,
Same data as in panel B but normalized with a different criterion.
For each value of [K+
]o, the normalized APD was referred to the
corresponding control value specified above.
7C, Jefflux, corresponding to a pacing frequency of 75 bpm
(BCL=800 ms) obtained with the model, is compared with
the experimental values obtained by Venkatesh et al34
 in
similar experimental conditions. In normoxia, both theoretical and experimental values agree nicely (1.11 versus
1.24 //mol-g^'-min"1
, respectively). However, in substrate-free hypoxia, the empirical Jetnux greatly exceeds the
maximum theoretical KATP-related Jefflux (1.79 versus 1.18
jiimol-g"1
 -min"1
, respectively).
Fig 7D compares the values of AJefflux caused by IKATP
activation, obtained with the model, with those obtained
experimentally in different conditions. For the theoretical
results, the maximum values of AJefflllx in each situation
have been chosen. The experimental values correspond to
the peak of the K+
 efflux rate during the ischemic episode.
It can be seen that, with only one exception, experimental
values of AJefflux increase with pacing frequency. The figure shows that theoretical AJefflux through KATP channels is
in the order of 5 to 7 times less than experimental values
obtained in similar conditions. Thus, IKATP activation does
not seem to quantitatively account for the entire observed
hypoxic/ischemic cellular K+
 loss. All these results will
be discussed in the next section.
Extracellular K+
 Accumulation
Many experimental studies have been published about
the time course of [K+
]o during ischemia. There is general
agreement in that, during early ischemia, [K+
]o initially
increases and then plateaus at a level of «10 to 12 mmol/
L 4.14,2030,35 rpj^ behavior ca n ^e qualitatively reproduced
by the model, as seen in Fig 8. In Fig 8A, no-flow ischemia
has been simulated by abruptly increasing fATP from 0%
to 1.0%, while preventing K+
 diffusion from the extracellular cleft to bulk extracellular medium (see "Materials
and Methods"). It can be noted from the figure that [K+
]o
is approximately constant during normoxic perfusion
(fATP=0%), because net K+
 efflux is zero in normal conditions. However, when KATP current becomes activated,
[K+
]o rises until a steady state is reached (within minutes),
when [K+
]o increases in a linear manner. This reflects the
constant value of Jrfflux in this situation (constant slope of
s=»0.13 mmol/L per second, which corresponds to a Jef^,,
of 0.075 /rniol-g-'-mirT1
).
In Fig 8B, no-flow ischemia is simulated in a more realistic manner. KATP channels are progressively (and linearly) activated from 0% to 2.5% during 10 minutes. In
this time frame, [K+
]o increases from 5.4 to 8.0 mmol/L,
reaching an approximately constant plateau.
Although the time course of [K+
]o shown in Fig 8B is
qualitatively similar to those obtained experimentally, the
values of [K+
]o reached are substantially smaller than the
measured ones. Thus, again it is shown how, according to
the model, ischemic K+
 loss through KATP channels does
not account for the total observed cellular K+
 loss.
Discussion
The extent to which activation of IK-ATP contributes to
the reduction of APD and to other electrophysiological
changes during metabolically impaired situations still remains unanswered from a quantitative point of view. We
have used a computer modeling approach to the problem
to elucidate this issue. Although computer models cannot
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on July 29, 2024
216 Circulation Research Vol 79, No 2 August 1996
A.
0.18
C.
Model
I I Experiments (Venkatesh et al)
2-
1.5 2.0 2.5 NORMOXIA HYPOXIA
B. D. 0.10 1.6 H
_p 1.4 4
• | 1.2- j
"so 1 0
 1
|
 08 1
S 0.6 -_
*f 0.4 4 <
 0.2 4
n n -
• Total A JT (experiments)
H Contribution of IK.A1P to A JT
500
667X
800 T
22m
f
1 200
gooj
(model)
500
—i "T
Tl
2.5 (a) (b) (c) (d) (e)
HYPOXIA
(f) (g) (d) (e)
ISCHEMIA
FIG 7. Model predictions regarding cellular K+
 loss related to KATP
channel activation. A, Net increment in K+
 efflux rate (AJT) vs fATP
for two values of BCL (indicated
beside each curve) and normal
ionic concentrations. B, Comparison between AJT values for two
different extracellular K+
 levels
(values of [K+
]o indicated beside
each curve). BCL was 800 ms. C,
Unidirectional K+
 efflux rates (JT)
in normally perfused conditions
and in substrate-free hypoxia
taken from Reference 34 compared with model results. In the
simulations, "normoxia" corresponds to an fATP of 0%, and
"hypoxia" corresponds to an fATP
of 0.9%, which yields the maximum value of JT. Ionic concentrations are those given in the
Table. Both in simulations and in
experiments, BCL was 800 ms. D,
Values of AJT corresponding to
different experimental results in
hypoxic and ischemic situations
compared with model results regarding the KATP-related K+
 loss.
Numbers over each bar indicate
the value (in milliseconds) of the
BCL used in the simulation experiment. In simulation results,
fATp yielding the maximum AJT
was considered. In experimental
ischemic results, the peak value
of AJT in the ischemic period
is represented. The abscissa is
labeled as follows: a, simulation (fATp=0.9%, normal ionic
concentrations); b, simulation
(fATP=1.0%, normal ionic concentrations); c, data from Reference
34; d, data from Reference 14; e,
data from Reference 4; f, simulation (fATP=0.7%, normal ionic concentrations except for [K+
]O=8.5
mmol/L); and g, data from Reference 16.
provide real data, they can be used to make predictions
and, in this case, can help us to understand the role of
KATp channels in hypoxia-ischemia from a theoretical
point of view.
The cardiac action potential model described by Luo
and Rudy,21
 which has been used in the present study, is
based on very recent patch-clamp data and reproduces
membrane dynamics with a great degree of electrophysiological detail. The inclusion of a new formulation of the
KATP current in this model makes it possible to simulate
metabolically impaired situations more comprehensively.
Model of IK-ATP
In its original form, the LR-II action potential model21
does not include a mathematical description of IK-ATP- The
first goal of the present study was to formulate a comprehensive model for this current. Our description of IK-ATP is
based on published experimental data regarding the main
characteristics of the current.14-
17-
22-
23
 We have integrated
the available data regarding IK_ATp dependencies on [K+
]o,
[Na+
]j, [Mg2+]l; [ATP]j, and [ADP]; in a single set of equations. The model of IK.ATP finally formulated satisfactorily
reproduces the main electrical features of KATP channels
(eg, see Fig 1A and compare with Fig 6A of Reference
24). Other factors not considered in the model have been
ignored because of their presumed lack of a physiological
role during the early phase of hypoxia/ischemia (eg, rundown of the channel24), lack of enough data to formulate
a reliable model (eg, dependence on pH;25>3M7
 and on other
nucleotides25'
38
 and effects of [Mg2+] on the fraction of
open channels39), or lack of agreement between different
authors (eg, dependence on lactate2540). It is to be noted
that the effects of some of these factors, particularly the
effects of acidosis, could be of considerable importance in
hypoxic/ischemic situations.
To our knowledge, only a few authors have incorporated
a model of IK.ATP in an AP model and used it to study the
effect of IK-ATP activation in cardiac myocytes. Nichols and
Lederer'2
 incorporated a formulation of I K A TP into the
model of rat ventricular AP described by Noble.41
 This
formulation included only the dependence on [ATP]b although the dependence on [ADP]; was implicitly considered. More recently, the incorporation of a model of IK.ATP
that considered dependencies on both [ATP]j and [K+] o to
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on July 29, 2024
Ferrero et al Model of the Cardiac ATP-Sensitive K+
 Current 217
B.
si
0-2.5% (linear)
FIG 8. Simulated time course of [K+
]o after opening of KATP channels. Values of fATP during time are represented below each plot.
A, Time course of [K+
]o after an abrupt opening of KATP channels
(fATp=1.0%). B, Time course of [K+
]o after a linear increase of fATP
from 0% to 2.5%. Note the different time scales in both panels.
an AP model has been reported.42
 In a different context,
Cook et al10
 used a simple computer model to explain the
spare-channel hypothesis for beta pancreatic cells. Our description of IK-ATP is more comprehensive than these previous attempts, because it considers dependencies on intracellular ionic concentrations and intracellular ADP as
well as on [K+
]o and [ATP];.
The model used in the present study has several limitations. In its present form, it cannot be used to simulate
true ischemia, for it lacks a description of other important
ischemia-related phenomena apart from IK-ATP activation.
Among them, the most important one might be the influence of acidosis on ionic currents. Also, intracellular ATP
decline, free Mg2+
 rise, and catecholamine release are
known to affect other ionic currents, and this should also
be considered in a more complete model. Specifically, a
more detailed model of the Na+
-K+
 pump would be desirable to determine net K+
 efflux during metabolic inhibition with more accuracy. In its present version, the pump
current dependencies on both [Na+
]; and [K+
]o are considered,21
 but the model lacks a description of its dependence
on ATP and other metabolically related parameters. The
influence of [Mg2+]; on APD through inward Ca2+
 channels43
 should also be considered. Finally, other pathophysiologically activated currents (such as the Na+
-activated
K+
 current and the free fatty acid-activated K+
 current)
also deserve some attention.
Effect of I KATP on APD
The theoretical results obtained with our model are in
excellent agreement with the spare-channel hypothesis that
was proposed by Cook et al10
 for pancreatic cells and was
later extended to cardiac cells, according to which only a
very small fraction of the total population of KATP channels
in a myocyte needs to be activated to account for the major
electrophysiological changes observed in metabolic impairment. Indeed, according to our model, activation of
< 1 % of the total number of KATP channels accounts for a
50% reduction in APD in all situations simulated. The
value of =0.6% obtained for normal ionic concentrations
correlates well with the values obtained experimentally using indirect methods, namely, 1%," 0.7%,13
 and 0.41%.14
The degree of KATP channel activation needed to account for a 50% reduction in APD might be easily
achieved in early hypoxic and ischemic situations. For example, Weiss et al14
 reported nucleotide levels of
[ATP],=4.3 mmol/L and [ADP],=95 /xmol/L after 10
minutes of substrate-free hypoxia. This would correspond,
according to Fig IB, to fATp=0.68%. In the same experimental study, 10 minutes of ischemia reduced intracellular
ATP to 4.6 mmol/L and increased free cytosolic ADP to
63 to 99 /xmol/L, which would yield a value between
0.57% and 0.63% for fATP. Thus, it is seen that even if
intracellular ATP levels fall only modestly during early
hypoxia/ischemia, activation of KATP channels may account for drastic reductions in APD. It is clear that the rise
in free cytosolic ADP levels is a key factor to quantitatively explain the APD reduction. Indeed, if [ADP]j was
held constant, fATP would reach a hypoxic/ischemic value
of only =0.2%, which is far less than the 0.6% needed to
reduce APD to half its control value.
Our results also indicate that the fraction of open KATP
channels that exist during normal perfusion causes some
degree of "baseline" shortening in the AP, which would
theoretically be reversed by applying a perfect KATP channel blocker. Indeed, using the normoxic values of intracellular ATP and ADP (6.8 mmol/L and 15 /xmol/L, respectively) reported by Weiss et al,14
 the normal value of
fATP would be 0.11%. According to Fig 2B, this would
cause a reduction in APD to =88% to 91 % of the value it
would have in the complete absence of IK-ATP- This result
is in agreement with one experimental report44
 but contradicts others regarding the inefficiency of sulfonylureas to
prolong APD in normally perfused myocytes.1734
 If we
consider a new reference value for APD that corresponds
to fATP=0.11%, then the fraction of open channels needed
to be activated to reduce APD to 50% of its normal value
would now be =0.7% instead of 0.6%.
Regarding the influence of intracellular cations on the
AP shortening caused by IK-ATP, the results of our model
show that pathophysiological levels of Mg2+
 exert a strong
influence on APD, whereas the direct (KATP-related) effect
of Na+
 is much less noticeable. Intracellular free Mg2+
 is
known to rise in early ischemia,33
 and this would reduce
the KATP-mediated effects of ATP depletion on APD (Fig
4). However, high levels of intracellular Mg2+
 are known
to significantly shorten APD by reducing Ca2+
 inward
currents.43
 Thus, elevated free [Mg2+]; would have at
least two opposite effects on APD, with KATP-dependent
effects partially counteracting Ca2+
 current-dependent
APD shortening.
As for the reduction of APD caused by increased Na+
levels (Fig 5B), it is mainly due to an enhanced activity of
the Na+
-K+
 pump as a response to high [Na+
];, being practically independent of KATP channel activity. This effect is
not likely to be physiologically significant: the extent to
which [Na+
]i increases during early ischemia is not unanimously established,20
 and whether the activity of the electrogenic Na+
-K+
 pump is enhanced or depressed during
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on July 29, 2024
218 Circulation Research Vol 79, No 2 August 1996
the first phase of ischemia and hypoxia is still not completely determined.20
Effects of IK-ATP Activation and High [K+
]o in
Ischemic AP Shortening
The question of the contribution of high extracellular
K+
 and of KATp channel activation to AP shortening is still
being debated. Although it is generally accepted that IK.ATP
activation is the key factor in ischemic APD reduction,"15
experimental evidence exists that questions this hypothesis.4
-
7
'
9
 According to a recent report by Yan et al,4
 ischemic
AP shortening would be due to high [K+
]o, and the role of
IK-ATP in this matter would be irrelevant because KATP channels would not become activated at all. The reduction of
APD following extracellular K+
 accumulation is due to the
[K+
]0-dependent change of the current-voltage relation. Indeed, elevated levels of [K+
]o produce an increase in both
the delayed rectifier current (IK) and the inward rectifier
current (IK1) because their conductance increases with [K+
]o
according to a square-root law21
 and rectification is partially
relieved. This elevation in outward current accelerates repolarization, thus leading to a shortening in APD.
The results of Yan et al,4
 however, show that hypoxia
with high [K+
]o produces an additional shortening of the
AP that is not due to high [K+
]o only (see Fig 7 of Reference
4). This result has also been obtained in another experimental study.45
 According to our theoretical results, a very
low degree of KATP channel activation may easily account
for this additional APD reduction. Indeed, both high [K+
]o
and IK.ATP activation cooperate to shorten AP (see Fig 6). In
the complete absence of IK-ATP activation, the Luo-Rudy
model21
 predicts a reduction of relative APD from 100% to
71% when [K+
]o rises from 4.0 to 10.3 mmol/L, which is
in very good agreement with the value reported by Yan.
Given this [K+
]o, <0.2% of the total population of KATP
channels would need to open to account for the additional
APD reduction (58%) observed by Yan. This degree of activation would in turn be achieved even with very modest
variations in intracellular nucleotide concentrations.
In another study, Kodama et al45
 observed that the reduction in APD caused by substrate-free hypoxia with a
high [K+
]o was similar to that obtained under normal
[K+
]o. If the data of their Table 1 regarding APD at 80%
repolarization are normalized in the same manner as in Fig
6C, it can be deduced that the normalized APD values for
different [K+
]o for 10 and 15 minutes of hypoxia are practically independent of the value of [K+
]o. Our results illustrated in Fig 6C are in agreement with this observation.
Moreover, their results regarding APD reduction in different degrees of hyperkalemia under normoxic and hypoxic conditions (see their Table 1) nicely agree with the
results of our model (partially depicted in Fig 6B), suggesting that the hypoxia-related AP shortening is mainly
due to the activation of IK-ATPIschemic K+
 Loss and Extracellular
K+
 Accumulation
Our results support the idea that KATP channel activation
does not fully account for the observed cellular K+
 loss
during hypoxia/ischemia. The model predicts the existence
of a net increment in Jrfflllx in hypoxia/ischemia, but its
magnitude is significantly lower than that observed experimentally (Fig 7C and 7D). Qualitatively, though, our
model predicts the well-known plateau of [K+
]o during the
early phase of ischemia (see Fig 8B). According to our
results, this plateau is reached because of the biphasic behavior of Ajefflux (Fig 7A and 7B). Initially, activation of
KATP channel causes an increase in AJefflux, but after a certain value of f ATP is reached, this trend changes and A Jefflux
declines until it reaches zero value. This would cause a
stabilization of [K+
]o, as shown in Fig 8B.
However, our simulations show that the fraction of the
total K+
 loss attributable to IK.ATP would be in the range
of 1/5 (Fig 7D), and so other mechanisms must account
for the bulk of the observed K+
 loss. Other possible mechanisms of K+
 loss include changes in other currents during
metabolic impairment, activation of other K+
 channels
during ischemia (such as the Na+
-activated K+
 channel),
cotransport of lactate or Cl~ anions, or extracellular space
shrinkage, among others (see Reference 20 for a review).
The results obtained with the model are in partial disagreement with one experimental result, which suggests
that a degree of KATP channel activation of <0.5% would
account for the observed hypoxic/ischemic K+
 loss.14
However, the model predictions dealing with the participation of IK-ATP in ischemic K+
 loss agree nicely with other
reported experimental values regarding the partial prevention of K+
 loss in ischemia by glibenclamide. For example,
the data from Hicks and Cobbe46
 indicate that the glibenclamide-prevented extracellular K+
 accumulation during
30 minutes of global ischemia in rabbit septum reached
4.1 mmol/L, a value equivalent to an average AJefflux of
0.071 //mol-g"1
 -min"1
 (using the value VECW=0.52 L/kg
wet wt reported by Weiss et al30), which is in the range of
values predicted by our model (see Fig 7D). In a study by
Yan et al,4
 glibenclamide reduced K+
 efflux from 4.51 to
3.47 ^mol/g wet wt in a 15-minute period of hypoxia with
high [K+
]o. This yields a value of 0.069 /anol-g~1
-min~i
for the average AJefflux due to the glibenclamide-blocked
currents (mainly IK-ATP), which is again in accordance with
the predictions of the model.
Sensitivity of the Results to Model Parameters
One important issue regarding computer models that
must always be taken into consideration is the sensitivity
of the results to the values of the model parameters. In the
model of IK-ATP presented here, parameters are, in general,
well matched to experimental measurements. The parameter that shows the greatest dispersion when measured experimentally is the [ATP] of half-maximum inhibition of
the channel (Km in Equation 4).14'
26
 However, its value
does not influence our conclusions because the results are
presented in terms of fATP.
Another parameter that could have influence in the quantitative results, because it multiplies fATP in Equation 1, is the
KATP channel density (<r). The value chosen (3.8 channels/
lira2
, derived from Reference 14) lies in the middle of the
range of reported values for guinea pig ventricular myocytes.
Figures as low as 0.55 channel//xm2
 have been reported,47
and if this value were to be adopted, all the results regarding
the value of fATP should be multiplied by a factor of 7, so the
results of the present study would be compromised. However, all subsequent estimates of the parameter a yielded
considerably higher values. If the estimate of Nichols et al13
(^5 channels//um2
, which is the highest value reported for
guinea pig cardiac cells) is taken into consideration, the values of fATp given in the present study would actually be 1.3
times smaller (eg, fATp needed for a 50% reduction in APD
would now be 0.45%). Thus, all qualitative results would still
withstand this examination.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on July 29, 2024
Ferrero et al Model of the Cardiac ATP-Sensitive K+
 Current 219
As for the values obtained for K+
 efflux, Equation 6
shows that the results are critically dependent on the chosen VECW, which has a rather uncertain value. The value
chosen for VECW (0.52 L/kg wet wt) is typical for rabbit
septa.30
 Values as low as 0.2 have been reported for other
animal species. If this value of 0.2 L/kg wet wt was
adopted, the results obtained regarding K+
 efflux rates
would have been 66% higher. Even in this extreme case,
the simulated values of AJefflux would still be on the order
of 3 to 4 times lower than the reported experimental
results.
Appendix 1: Formulation of IK-ATP
General Equation
The general equation that describes the total current density
through the KATp channels is the following:
where a is the channel density, g0 is the unitary conductance, p0
is the maximum channel open probability (in the absence of
ATP), fATP is the fraction of open KATP channels, Vm is membrane
potential, and EK-ATP is the reversal potential.
The value chosen for the channel density was <r=3.8 channels/
jjm2
, and po was fixed at a value of 0.91.
Unitary Conductance
The expression for the conductance of a single fully open channel is as follows:
(9) go=yofMfNfT
The term y0 is the unitary conductance in the absence of intracellular Na+
 and Mg2+
 and depends on [K+
]o:
(10) yo=35.375 [K+
]o
5.4
where y0 is obtained in pS ([K+
]o in mmol/L).
The term fM in Equation 9 accounts for inward rectification
caused by intracellular Mg2+
 ions and is formulated by means of
a Hill equation:
(11) 1M—~
1
1 , [Mg2+],
^h.Mg
where the half-maximum saturation constant (KhMg) depends on
membrane potential and on [K + ] o :
(12)
with the value of the electrical distance (6Mg) being 0.32. F is the
Faraday constant, R is the gas constant, and T is the absolute
temperature. The factor K°hMll is given by the following:
(13) KhMg(
(both K\Me and [K+
]o in mmol/L).
The term fN in Equation 9 accounts for inward rectification
caused by intracellular Na+
 ions and is again formulated by
means of a Hill equation:
(14)
1
1 +
Na+
]
where the value of the half-maximum saturation constant (Kh_m)
depends on membrane voltage:
(15)
The value adopted for electrical distance (<5Na) is 0.35, whereas
AT\Na is 25.9 mmol/L.
Finally, the temperature (T) effect was introduced in Equation
9 according to the following expression:
(ID) IT(1)~V10
where Qlo, T, and To indicate temperature coefficient, absolute
temperature, and reference temperature, respectively, with
Q1()=1.3 and T0=36°C.
Fraction of Activated KATP Channels
In the model, the term fATp in Equation 8 depends on concentrations of intracellular ATP and of free cytosolic ADP, according
to the following expression:
(17)
1
l+([ATPy/CJH
where both the maximum-inhibition constant (Km) and the Hill
coefficient (H) depend on [ADP];. The equations that express
these dependencies are as follows:
(18) £m=35.8+17.9[ADP]i0256
(with Km in ^mol/L and [ADP]j in ^mol/L) and
(19) H=1.3+0.74exp(-0.09[ADP]i)
(with [ADP], in ^mol/L).
Reversal Potential
The reversal potential of the KATP channel (EK,ATP) is equal to the
equilibrium potential for K+
 and is thus given by the Nernst equation:
(20) RT
l
Appendix 2: Calculation of K+
 Efflux
Calculation of the Average K+
 Outward
Current Density
The total instantaneous K+
 current density (IK,T) through the
membrane is the sum of all the sarcolemmal currents carried by
K+
 ions. In the LR-II model, this is expressed as follows:
(21) lKT = IcaK+lK + lKI+lKp~2INaK-t~InsK + lK-ATP
Subtracting the inward current carried by the Na+
-K+
 pump from
the total K+
 current, we obtain the total outward K+
 current (IK,O)
:
The average outward current density (Iolll) was then calculated
as the integral mean value of IKiO:
(23) I, i r
lut~BCL Jn
Iicodt
Derivation of Equation 6
The K+
 efflux rate (JemUx) can be defined as the number of
moles of K+
 leaving the cell (noin) per unit time (At) and unit
tissue weight (Am):
(24) J efflux — . . .
AtAm
The number of moles of nou, can be related to the electric
charge carried by K+
 ions leaving the cell (Ql1ut) by means of the
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on July 29, 2024
220 Circulation Research Vol 79, No 2 August 1996
Faraday constant (nou,=Qoul/F). Along with this, Qollt is related to
the average K+
 outward current density (Iout) as
(25) Qou.=Iou.AmAt
where Am is the total membrane area of all the myocytes contained in the tissue of unit mass Am.
Rearranging the equations, we obtain the following:
(26) T -
J
 efflux FAm
Now the total membrane area (Am) can be related to the total
cell volume (Vcci) by means of the surface-to-volume ratio of
the myocyte (Sv): Am = Vce,-Sv. Moreover, Vce, can be expressed as the difference between the total tissue volume (Vt)
and the volume occupied by the extracellular water (Ve). Thus,
we obtain the following:
The term Am/V, in the previous equation is the tissue density
(p), and the term Ve/Am is the extracellular water content per
unit weight (VECw)- This yields the following:
(28)
Sv ( ~l
I o ut
Finally, if we want to express Jefflux in ^mol • g ' • min ' while
having Sv in ^m2
//im3
, F in coulomb/mol, p in g/crn3
, VFCW in
mL/g, and Iom in ^tA/cm2
, then a unit conversion factor of 600 000
is needed in Equation 25. The resultant equation is identical to
Equation 6 in the text.
Acknowledgments
This study was supported in part by the Conselleria de Educacion y Ciencia de la Generalitat Valenciana (Programa de Formacidn, Perfeccionamiento y Movilidad de Profesores e Investigadores 94/4158). The authors would like to thank Dr Vicente
Lopez Merino for helpful discussions.
References
I. Trautwein W, Gottstein U, Dudel J. Der aktionsstrom der myokardfaser im sauerstoffmangel. Pflugers Arch. 1954;260:40-60.
2. Wit AL, Janse MJ. The Ventricular Arrhythmias of Ischemia and
Infarction: Etectrophysiological Mechanisms. New York, NY: Futura Publishing Co Inc; 1993:86-87/207-208.
3. Morena H, Janse MJ, Fiolet JWT, Krieger WJG, Crijns H, Durrer D.
Comparison of the effects of regional ischemia, hypoxia, hyperkalemia and acidosis on intracellular and extracellular potentials and
metabolism in the isolated porcine heart. Circ Res. 1980;46:634-646.
4. Yan G-X, Yamada KA, Kleber AG, McHowat J, Corr PB. Dissociation between cellular K+
 loss, reduction in repolarization time, and
tissue ATP levels during myocardial hypoxia and ischemia. Circ Res.
1993;72:560-570.
5. Vleugels A, Vereecke J, Carmeliet E. Ionic currents during hypoxia in
voltage-clamped cat ventricular muscle. Circ Res. 1980:47:501-508.
6. Noma A. ATP-regulated K channels in cardiac muscle. Nature.
1983:305:147-148.
7. Elliot AC, Smith GL, Allen DG. Simultaneous measurements of action potential duration and intracellular ATP in isolated ferret hearts
exposed to cyanide. Circ Res. 1989:64:583-591.
8. De Lorenzi F, Cai S, Schanne OF, Ruiz-Petrich E. Partial contribution
of the ATP-sensitive K+
 current to the effects of mild metabolic depression in rabbit myocardium. Mol Cell Biochem. 1994:132:133-143.
9. Nakaya H, Takeda Y, Tohse N, Kanno M. Effects of ATP-sensitive
K+
 channel blockers on the action potential shortening in hypoxic
and ischaemic myocardium. Br J Pharmacol. 1991;103:1019-1026.
10. Cook DL, Satin LS, Ashford U, Hales N. ATP-sensitive K+
 channels
in pancreatic J-cells: spare-channel hypothesis. Diabetes. 1988:37:
495-498.
11. Faivre JF, Findlay I. Action potential duration and activation of ATPsensitive K+
 current in isolated guinea-pig ventricular myocytes.
Biochim Biophys Acta. 1990:1029:167-172.
12. Nichols CG, Lederer WJ. The regulation of ATP-sensitive K+
 channel activity in intact and permeabilized rat ventricular myocytes. J
Physiol (Lond). 1990;423:91-110.
13. Nichols CG, Ripoll C, Lederer WJ. ATP-sensitive potassium channel
modulation of the guinea pig ventricular action potential and contraction. Circ Res. 1991:68:280-287.
14. Weiss JN, Venkatesh N, Lamp ST. ATP-sensitive K+
 channels and
cellular K+
 loss in hypoxic and ischaemic mammalian ventricle. J
Physiol (Lond). 1992;447:649-673.
15. Gasser RNA, Vaughan-Jones RD. Mechanism of potassium efflux
and action potential shortening during ischaemia in isolated mammalian cardiac muscle. J Physiol (Lond). 1990;431:713-741.
16. Kantor PF, Coetzee WA, Carmeliet EE, Dennis SC, Opie LH. Reduction of ischemic K+
 loss and arrhythmias in rat hearts: effect of
glibenclamide, a sulfonylurea. Circ Res. 1990:66:478-485.
17. Wilde AAM, Escande D, Schumacher CA, Thuringer D, Mestre M,
Fiolet JWT, Janse MJ. Potassium accumulation in the globally ischemic mammalian heart: a role for the ATP-sensitive potassium
channel. Circ Res. 1990;67:835-843.
18. Vanheel G, De Hemptinne A. Influence of KAn> channel modulation
on net potassium efflux from ischaemic mammalian cardiac tissue.
Cardiovasc Res. 1992;26:1030-1039.
19. Wilde AAM, Schumacher C, Fiolet J, Opthof T, Janse MJ. Mere
opening of KATP channels does not contribute to accumulation of K+
in the globally ischemic rabbit heart. / Mol Cell Cardiol. 1992;
24(suppl I):S276. Abstract.
20. Wilde AAM, Aksnes G. Myocardial potassium loss and cell depolarisation in ischaemia and hypoxia. Cardiovasc Res. 1995:29:1-15.
21. Luo C-H, Rudy Y. A dynamic model of the cardiac ventricular action
potential, I: simulations of ionic currents and concentration changes.
Circ Res. 1994;74:1071-1096.
22. Kakei M, Noma A, Shibasaki T. Properties of adenosine-triphosphate-regulated potassium channels in guinea-pig ventricular cells. J
Physiol (Lond). 1985:363:441-462.
23. Horie M, Irisawa H, Noma A. Voltage-dependent magnesium block
of adenosine-triphosphate-sensitive potassium channel in guinea-pig
ventricular cells. J Physiol (Lond). 1987;387:251-272.
24. Trube G, Hescheler J. Inward-rectifying channels in isolated patches
of heart cell membrane: ATP-dependence and comparison with cellattached patches. Pflugers Arch. 1984;401:178-184.
25. Lederer WJ, Nichols CG. Nucleotide modulation of the activity of
rat heart ATP-sensitive K+
 channels in isolated membrane patches.
J Physiol (Lond). 1989:419:193-211.
26. Findlay I, Faivre JF. ATP-sensitive K channels in heart muscle: spare
channels. FEBS Lett. 1991;279:95-97.
27. Terzic A, Tung RT, Kurachi Y. Nucleotide regulation of ATP sensitive potassium channels. Cardiovasc Res. 1994:28:746-753.
28. Findlay I. Effects of ADP upon the ATP-sensitive K+
 channel in rat
ventricular myocytes. J Memhr Biol. 1988:101:83-92.
29. Mogul DJ, Singer DH, Ten Eick RE. Dependence of Na-K pump
current on internal Na in mammalian cardiac myocytes. Am J Physiol.
1990;259:H488-H496.
30. Weiss JN, Lamp ST, Shine Kl. Cellular K' loss and anion efflux
during myocardial ischemia and metabolic inhibition. Am J Physiol.
1989;256:H1165-H1175.
31. Gear CW. The automatic integration of stiff ordinary differential
equations. In: Morrel AJH, ed. Information Processing. Amsterdam,
Netherlands: North Holland; 1969.
32. Lederer WJ, Nichols CG, Smith GL. The mechanism of early contractive failure of isolated rat ventricular myocytes subjected to complete metabolic inhibition. / Physiol (Lond). 1989;413:329-349.
33. Borchgrevink PC, Bergan AS, Bakoy OE, Jynge P. Magnesium and
reperfusion of ischemic rat heart as assessed by 3'P-NMR. Am J Physiol. 1989;256:H195-H204.
34. Venkatesh N, Lamp ST, Weiss JN. Sulfonylureas, ATP-sensitive K+
channels, and cellular K+
 loss during hypoxia, ischemia, and metabolic inhibition in mammalian ventricle. Circ Res. 1991 ;69:623-637.
35. Kleber AG. Extracellular potassium accumulation in acute myocardial ischemia. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 1984;16:389-394.
36. Fan Z, Makielski JC. Intracellular H + and Ca+
 modulation of trypsinmodified ATP-sensitive K+
 channels in rabbit ventricular myocytes.
Circ Res. 1993;72:715-722.
37. Fan Z, Furukawa T, Sawanobori T, Makielski JC, Hiraoka M. Cytoplasmic acidosis induces multiple conductance states in ATP-sensitive potassium channels of cardiac myocytes. J Membr Biol. 1993;
136:169-179.
38. Terzic A, Findlay I, Hosoya Y, Kurachi Y. Dualistic behaviour of
ATP-sensitive K+
 channels toward intracellular nucleoside diphosphates. Neuron. 1994;12:1049-1058.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on July 29, 2024
Ferrero et al Model of the Cardiac ATP-Sensitive K + Current 221
39. Findlay I. ATP-sensitive K+
 channels in rat ventricular myocytes are
blocked and inactivated by internal divalent cations. Pflugers Arch.
1987;410:313-320.
40. Keung EC, Li Q. Lactate activates ATP-sensitive potassium channels
in guinea pig ventricular myocytes. 3 Clin Invest. 1991;88:1772-
1777.
41. Noble D. Oxsoft Heart Program Manual (Version 2.1'). Oxford, UK:
OXSOFTLtd; 1988.
42. Shaw R, Rudy Y. Electrophysiological changes of ventricular tissue
under ischemic conditions: a simulation study. Comp Cardiol. 1994;
16:641-644.
43. Agus ZS, Kelepouris E, Dukes I, Morad M. Cytosolic magnesium
modulates calcium channel activity in mammalian ventricular cells.
Am J Pkysiol. 1989;256:C452-C455.
44. Faivre JF, Findlay I. Effects of tolbutamide, glibenclamide and diazoxide upon action potentials recorded from rat ventricular muscle.
Biochim Biophys Ada. 1989;984:l-5.
45. Kodama I, Wilde AAM, Janse MJ, Durrer D, Yamada K. Combined
effects of hypoxia, hyperkalemia and acidosis on membrane action
potential and excitability of guinea-pig ventricular muscle. J Mol Cell
Cardiol 1984,16:247-259.
46. Hicks MN, Cobbe SM. Effect of glibenclamide on extracellular potassium accumulation and the electrophysiological changes during
myocardial ischaemia in the arterially perfused interventricular septum of rabbit. Cardiovasc Res. 1991:25:407-413.
47. Noma A, Shibasaki T. Membrane current through adenosine-triphosphate-regulated potassium channels in guinea-pig ventricular cells. J
Physiol (Lond). 1985;363:463-480.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on July 29, 2024